
      And, O monarch, this also is an excellent season for thy son to go
ahunting! O, return in haste, and with your brothers search for him. Thy wish, O
son of Kunti, is about to be gratified. When by the repeated descents of their
maces, O monarch, they mangled each other, the battle they fought became
exceedingly dreadful and perfectly unrestrained. Strong men, O monarch, engage
in battle depending on their might, and not on the force of numbers nor on
information of the enemys plans procured through spies.
      Worshipped by those regenerate ones, Vala, O king, then set out from that
foremost of all tirthas on the Sarasvati (Sapta-Saraswat). Do thou, O beautiful
one, know these sacrificing priests that are seven by their nature. Why dost
thou not behold me, O wretch, standing here for an encounter with the mace? I
have now told thee, O thou of great splendour, everything about the acts, O
Bharata, of both the Kurus and the Pandavas. Hearing these words of his, Amva
then, O king, afflicted with the arrows of the god of love, addressed Salwa,
saying, Say not so, O lord of the earth, for it is not so!
      In that tirtha, the celestials had, in days of yore, O king, installed
Skanda, that slayer of the enemies of the gods, in the supreme command of their
army. That which we could not in imagination even aspire to obtain hath now
become ours, O thou of unfading glory! O Brahmana, the fire spread, and consumed
the lions, elephants and other creatures that were on the mountain. He that
disregarding profit and duty, turneth his thoughts to sin must, O Partha, reap
the fruit of his sinful actions. And surrounded, O king, by a large army
consisting of the four kinds of forces, the hero came back to the excellent city
of Sakraprastha.
      O hero, as thou art leading the life of an anchorite, this slaughter
without cause is unlike thee. Arjuna replied,--Superior persons, O Bharata,
never prate about the harsh words that may or may not be uttered by inferior
men. As thou tellest me, O, Bhishma, I am Kuntis son, and not the son of a Suta!
The son of Drona then, O Bharata, pierced Arjuna with a dozen gold-winged arrows
of great energy and Vasudeva with ten. And, O Bharata, Drona, hearing the twang
of his bowstring in the night, came to him, and clasping him, said, Truly do I
tell thee that I shall do that unto thee by which there shall not be an archer
equal to thee in this world.
      Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Kama said, Let other spies, abler and
more cunning, and capable of accomplishing their object, quickly go hence, O
Bharata. So also, O Yudhishthira, a person skilled at dice approacheth one that
is not so skilled from a desire of vanquishing him. I desire, O lord, to dwell
within the dominions of another king. Addressing one another, O Bharata, they
declared their names and families. Know, O king, that all these ladies of thy
house are staying with their feet raised for the journey, from desire of
beholding Kunti, and Gandhari, and my father-in-law.
      Addressing Bhimas daughter, O Bharata, he distressed king Nala spake
those words unto Damayanti over and over again. O king of the Kurus, as thou art
born in the race of the Pauravas ever noted for white (virtuous) deeds, such an
act hath scarcely been worthy of thee. And, O hero, without doubt, my affection
towards thee is now the same as before. And Dhritarashtra then addressed
Gandhari and said, Behold, O Gandhari, this thy son of wicked soul,
transgressing all my commands, is about to sacrifice both sovereignty and life
in consequence of his lust for sovereignty. At Dhritarashtras departure, O king,
all the citizens of Hastinapore became as distressed as they had been, O
monarch, when they had witnessed the departure of the Pandavas in former days
after their defeat at the match at dice.
      Vaisampayana said,--O best of the Bharatas, O great king, if thou
desirest to hear, then listen to me as I narrate to thee everything again in
detail. And, O king of kings, Bhishmaka, the mighty king of the Bhojas--the
friend of Indra--the slayer of hostile heroes--who governs a fourth part of the
world, who by his learning conquered the Pandyas and the Kratha-Kausikas, whose
brother the brave Akriti was like Rama, the son of Jamdagni, hath become a
servitor to the king of Magadha. Let him, O Dhritarashtra, rule the earth, to
the exclusion of all thy sons, Yudhishthira is the foremost of all thy heirs.
Re-instating them in their position, thou wilt, in this world, be cleansed of
all thy sins and be, O king of men, an object of worship with even those that
have their souls under control. The arms of many combatants, decked with
ornaments of gold, cut off, O king, by foes, writhed on the ground, making
diverse kinds of motions.
      Therefore, O Vidura, go whither-so-ever thou pleasest. And, O lord of the
earth, Nala suffered such dire woe all alone and recovered his prosperity,
whereas thou, O son of Pandu, with heart fixed on virtue, art sporting in joy in
this great forest, accompanied by thy brothers and Krishna. What, however, O
Pandavas, is capable of being done by either speech or act, will all be done by
me. King Duryodhana, beholding that carnage of his own troops, O lord, became
filled with rage. Then Drona, O monarch, proclaiming his name in that battle,
covered Bhima said, That car which formerly bore Brahma and Isana and Indra and
Varuna (to battle), mounting upon that car, have two Krishnas gone.
      And, O Duryodhana, like thee who lookest upon this kingdom as thy
paternal property, the Pandavas also look upon it as their paternal possession.
O monarch, binding Duryodhana fast, make peace with the Pandavas. This wonderful
feat, O king, was accomplished there by that great river. Their names, O king,
were Pushpotkata, Raka and Malini. Repairing thither, O son of Pritha, with thy
brothers, enjoy ye in that mansion and sit to a friendly match at dice.
      Here, in this region, O bull among Bharatas, the regents of the worlds, O
Galava, every morning and evening, proclaim, What business of what person shall
we do? Hearing of and beholding that great danger of his brother (Yudhishthira),
Partha quickly addressed Krishna, saying, Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesha.
Possessed of great prowess and great dexterity of hand, that mighty car-warrior
for the sake of Bhishma, battled with Chekitana, O Bharata, according to the
utmost of his power. Knowest thou not, that Kesava is incapable of being
withstood in battle by gods and men and Vaisampayana said, After Vidura had said
this, Kesava, that slayer of hostile divisions, endued with great energy,
addressed Dhritarashtras son, Duryodhana, and said, From delusion, O Suyodhana,
thou regardest great speed, the clatter of whose wheels resounded like the
rumbling of the clouds, and which was covered all over with white tiger-skins,
and unto which were harnessed his steeds Saivya (and others). What dost thou do
here, O timid one?
      Sanjaya continued, Thus rebuked, O monarch, by Yudhishthira and his
brothers, thy royal son, lying within those waters, O king of kings, heard those
bitter words and became very miserable. A portion remains of the share allotted
to Karna and thyself, O thou of great splendour. Hath any evil befallen thy
troops, O Bharata? O child, these thy brothers are all fatigued and thirsty.
Supporting themselves against broken boxes of cars and the bodies of slain
elephants and steeds, behold, O thou of great might, those ladies, worn out with
fatigue, are resting themselves.
      And hearing that the dice were uniformly unfavourable to the virtuous
Nala, and that he had lost everything, she again spake unto her nurse, saying, O
Vrihatsena, go thou again in Nalas name to bring hither, O blessed one, the
charioteer, Varshneya. Indeed, O lord, the kingdom of that monarch began to
waste away, even as a large forest begins to disappear when men proceed to cut
it down with the axe. If I stay in battle and fight the Pandavas, my army, O
driver, will rally and come back with vigour to battle. I find the fire-god come
in his own embodiment, this day, therefore do thou, O Muni, offer him a seat and
water, and a cow, and water for washing the feet. Beholding the celebrated king
of the Kulutas slain, thy troops, O bull of Bharatas race exceedingly
distressed, fled away.
      O child, when we grew weary of the long periods of life alloted to us, it
was then that we desired our own destruction through the instrumentality of the
Kshatriyas. Then Drona slew Viratas steeds with eight straight shafts, and then
his charioteer, O chief of the Bharatas, with one shaft. During the progress of
that fierce battle, and after Dhrishtadyumnas son had been slain, Krishna, O
lion among kings, addressed Partha, saying, The Pancalas are being exterminated.
O king, thou art our revered superior and chief refuge. The powerful
Dhrishtadyumna followed without loss of time king Virata: and Dhananjaya
followed the illustrious and mighty charioteer Yajnasena; and the mighty
Bhimasena followed Bhishma and Dhritarashtra: and Sahadeva, that master of
battle, followed the brave Drona and his son; and Nakula, O king, followed
Suvala with his son; and the sons of Draupadi with the son of Subhadra followed
those mighty warriors--the kings of the mountainous countries.
      For evermore, O Sanjaya, my desire hath been that I should tell them
nothing else than that peace would be acceptable to king Dhritarashtra. A little
after, O monarch, the son of Prishata in sweet accents asked the illustrious
Rishi about the wedding of his daughter. O mother, either let him enter the
palace, or give me permission to go to him. Why then, O lord, hast thou come in
person? Knowing this, O bull of Bharatas race, and deliberating in thy mind, it
behoveth thee, O mighty-armed one, to accomplish what is proper.
      It behoveth me not, O thou of sweet smiles, to instruct thee as to thy
duties towards thy lords. And then, O king, the earth, oppressed with weight and
afflicted with fear, sought the protection of the Grandsire of all creatures.
And when I was tired, they that brought those valuable articles from distant
Duryodhana said,--Listen now, O Bharata, about all the most costly articles I
saw, belonging unto the sons of Pandu, and brought one after another by the
kings of the earth. But, O thou blest with length of days, those that guide the
car are taught that the warrior on the car is, by all means, to be protected by
his charioteer! Those kings, however, O monarch, that had been the Yajamanas of
Gautama, continued to worship Gautamas sons after the sire had proceeded to
heaven.
      Dhritarashtra said,--When the Sun rose, O Sanjaya, of my army led by
Bhishma and the Pandava army led by Bhima, which first cheerfully approached the
other, desirous of fight? Beholding Vabhru slain, Keshava of great energy
addressed his elder brother and said, ‘Do thou, O Rama wait for me here till I
place the ladies under the care of kinsmen.’ Entering the city of Dwaravati,
Janardana said these words unto his father, ‘Do thou protect all the ladies of
our house, till Dhananjaya comes. And I also, O king, with my arrows resembling
snakes of virulent poison, cut into fragments all those arrows of Rama and
caused them to fall down on the earth like snakes cut into pieces. Bestow me on
Agastya, and, O father, save thyself, by giving me away. A perfect Babel of
voices of the shouting warriors was incessantly heard there, O royal Bharata, as
they addressed one another by name.
      The Vasus then said, It behoveth thee to throw thy children after birth,
into the water, so that, O thou of three courses (celestial, terrestrial, and
subterranean) we may be rescued soon without having to live on earth for any
length of time. I dare not, O foremost of regenerate ones, address such humble
words to the Pandavas. The earth being drenched with blood, O king, that thick
and frightful dust soon disappeared. 52 Sanjaya said, Those Kshatriyas, O
monarch, harbouring feelings of animosity against one another and longing to
take one anothers life, began to slay one another in that battle. And the king
said, Go, O child, unto Gandhari, possessed of great wisdom and foresight and
bring her hither.
      And, O descendant of Kurus, beholding his son--that enhancer of Kausalyas
joy--king Dasaratha became highly pleased. O scion of Madhus race! Thou art not,
O sinful man, willing to give them their paternal share in the kingdom, although
they are begging it of thee. O tell us truly, for we have great doubts! Arjuna
said,--How, O slayer of Madhu, can I with arrows contend in battle against
Bhishma and Drona, deserving as they are.
      Will, O king, her residence in the woods be productive of fruits? Thou
art competent, O mighty-armed one, aided by thy own celestial energy, to
afflict, O giver of honours, the Pandavas and the Panchalas. With acts and means
and applying thy power of illusion to these waters, slay, O chief of the
Bharatas, this Suyodhana, who is the very soul of illusion! The sun, O Bharata,
had risen when the battle commenced. O thou of large eyes, till the termination
of this my vow, I cannot enter thy city.
      O sire, when the destruction of all creatures approacheth, wrong assuming
the semblance of right leaveth not the heart. Vidura further told me, As long
also as Dhritarashtra will live, O giver of honours, even that sinful wight will
act sinfully towards you! Shalya, however, quickly pierced in return each of
those great bowmen with five arrows, O king, which feat seemed exceedingly
wonderful. Either seize king Yudhishthira the just or slay Dhananjaya and
Bhimasena, O son of Radha, and the twin sons of Madri. O Bhima, that Arjuna the
clatter of whose car-wheels caused the entire earth with her mountains and
forests, her mobile and immobile things to tremble, and whose birth dispelled
all the sorrows of Kunti, that exalted hero, that younger brother of thine, O
Bhimasena, now maketh me weep for him.
      Do thou therefore, O Arjuna, the son of Kunti, select some spot where we
may pass our days undiscovered by our enemies. this doubt of thine that is born
of ignorance and that dwelleth in thy mind, betake to devotion, (and) arise, O
son of Bharata. And, O bull in Bharatas race, Yudhishthira paid homage unto
virtue, pleasure, and profit, in judicious proportion, as if each were a friend
dear unto him as his own self. What, O Karna, dost thou think? The king
ascertaining everything, was filled with joy, and addressing that female
cannibal disguised as a human being possessing the complexion of gold, asked,--O
thou of the complexion of the filament of the lotus, who art thou that givest me
this child?
      Then Samana and Udana also, O blessed one, said these words--Thou dost
not dwell here, pervading all this, as we do. Know that this excellent child is
conversant with all weapons, O monarch, take him now. If thou strivest for peace
by restraining thy sons, it will be to thy profit, O king, as also to the
benefit of the Pandavas. Do thou, O celestial sage, listen, even from her as to
the husband she hath chosen herself! By the little merit I have acquired through
waiting dutifully on my husband, by that merit so difficult to attain, I shall
curse thee, O wielder of the discus and the mace!
      Hearing this Kichaka said, I will, O thou of graceful hips, do even as
thou sayest. And, O king, free from guile and with a cheerful spirit, one
should, according to his power, bestow gifts, after going down to the recipient
and paying him homage. Thousands among them, O king, were exceedingly terrible,
looking like infuriated elephants of gigantic size. O thou of ascetic wealth, I
desire to hear the histories in detail of those famous monarchs endued with
learning and all accomplishments. Indeed, with those lifeless heads with
upturned eyes, that were exceedingly mangled (with shafts and other weapons),
the field of battle, O king, looked resplendent as if strewn with full blown
lotuses.
      Well-cased in armour and coats of mail and adorned with head-gears,
combatants endued with great strength rushed at their foes, with maces and short
clubs and spiked bludgeons looking like uplifted rods of the Destroyer, and
jumping, O sire, and challenging one another, uttered loud shouts. Therefore, O
Bhima, slay not his soldiers. Like the tempest agitating the ocean, Vijaya, O
foremost of kings, in that battle, agitated that host of thine teeming with
horsemen. Shalya said, All great car-warriors, O Karna, say that this foremost
of car-warriors, (Arjuna), even when alone, is invincible. Blessed be thou, O
mighty-armed Duryodhana, judge properly!
      O illustrious one, bestow on us good fortune and joy. With this wealth, O
king, I will stake with thee. Uluka also, O king, desirous of rescuing his sire
in that engagement, pierced Bhima with seven arrows and Sahadeva with seventy.
Towards the close of that period, O sinless one, Vyasa came there. O thou lord
of birds, be propitious to us who solicit thy mercy!
      50 The Siddhis said, Listen, O Devala of rigid vows, as we speak to thee
the truth. O sire, the mighty bowmen of both thy army and that of the Pandavas,
inflamed with wrath, fought furiously with one another, as if they were
possessed of by the Rakshasas and demons. Amva said, My misery, O holy one,
should by any means be dispelled by thee. Reflecting on all this, O thou of
Vrishnis race, I looked on with indifference! O chief of the Bharatas, for
whatever acts I may be fit, employing myself therein with my whole heart, I will
bear the burthen of those acts of thine.
      On that occasion, O Krishna, I said unto king Duryodhana, O son, cast off
(from thy side) the wrathful Shakuni. Having seen, O Krishna, the princess of
Panchala brought in that plight into the midst of the assembly, how can my wrath
be appeased without the slaughter of Suyodhana. Galava said, O Garuda, O slayer
of foremost snakes, O thou of beautiful feathers, O son of Vinata, carry me, O
Tarkhya, to the east where the two eyes of Dharma are first opened. Having
vanquished the son of Drona, and other great car-warriors, Arjuna, O king,
addressing Vasudeva, said, Behold, O Krishna of mighty arms, the Pandava army is
flying away. Deprived of his shield, O monarch, and placed under Kripas power
Shikhandi still rushed, sword in hand, (towards Kripa), like a sick man towards
the jaws of Death.
      Bhima said,--Shall I, O king, slay, without loss of time all these foes
assembled together, even here, or shall I destroy them, O Bharata, by the roots,
outside this palace? O child, although thou livest unharmed, having slain all my
children, yet no grief would have been mine if thou hadst adopted the path of
righteousness (in slaying them).’ Vaishampayana continued, Having said these
words, Gandhari, filled with wrath at the slaughter of all her sons and
grandsons, enquired after Yudhishthira, saying, ‘Where is the king?’ After she
had said these words king Yudhishthira, trembling and with joined hands,
approached her and said these soft words unto her, ‘Here is Yudhishthira, O
goddess, that cruel slayer of thy sons! And Yudhishthira said, O valiant king,
it has been well-done by thee that being pleased at heart thou hast plighted thy
truth to Duryodhana. Salya continued, Indra, well-pleased, began to question
that best of saints and greatest of Brahmanas when he was seated on a seat after
receiving due honours, thus, O revered saint, O best of Brahmanas, I wish to
have it recited by thee how Nahusha of vicious soul was hurled from heaven. And
the Kuru king, going over the plain with Karna in his company, caused his camp
to be measured out on a level part, O monarch, of that plain.
      Having achieved the most difficult feats, both of them, O sinless one,
have departed hence to heaven. Having praised Mahadeva in this manner, the Rishi
bowed to him, Let not this absence of gravity, ridiculous in the extreme, that I
displayed, O god, destroy my ascetic merit! With his Sanjaya said, In the
afternoon of that day, O king, a dreadful battle, characterised by roars, deep
as those of the clouds, once more occurred between Drona and the Somakas. O
grinder of foes, cheerful I was not when taken away by Bhishma! Arjuna said,
Where, indeed, is that Brahmanas wife, O Krishna, and where is that foremost of
Brahmanas, by both of whom was such success attained.
      The auspicious damsel, bearing those words of the great Rishi in her
mind, began to cook those jujubes although the latter, O king, showed no signs
of softening. Then, O Bharata, heaps of fallen wheels and yokes, of quivers, of
banners and standards, with the vehicles themselves that bore them, of shafts
and Anukarshas and Trivenus, of axles and traces and goads, of heads of warriors
decked with earrings and headgears, of arms, O monarch, and thighs in thousands
of umbrellas along with fans, and of diadems and crowns, were seen along the
tracks of Parthas car. In consequence of the strength of thy penances, thou art
able, O highly blessed one, to burn, with thy eyes kindled with rage, the whole
Earth with her mobile and immobile creatures! Sakra replied, Thy prowess is
unrivalled, O hero, do thou therefore vanquish the enemies of the gods.
Beholding his sons and grandsons and brothers and friends lying dead, he said
unto me these words, O chief of Bharata’s race, The destruction of this our race
has at last come.
      Then, O Janamejaya, the Earth, opening with those strokes having the
force of thunder, yielded a way to the (nether) regions inhabited by the Nagas.
Urging their steeds and elephants to greater speed, thousands of warriors fled
away, O bull of Bharatas race, bent only upon their own safety. And, O Bharata,
that hero also felled the foremost of cavalry soldiers. And, O son of Pandu,
when the illustrious one found that death did not result from that fall, he
kindled a huge fire in the forest and entered it with alacrity. Rule over her, O
monarch, and observe the duties of thy order!
      On what food, O puissant one, did the high-souled Pandavas support
themselves, with their men, and wives, while they lived in the woods? At this,
the royal son of Dharma bowing with his brothers unto Narada, who was the
revered of the celestials, told him with joined hands, O thou that art highly
blessed and worshipped by all the worlds when thou art gratified with me, I
regard all my wishes in consequence of thy grace, as already fulfilled, O thou
of excellent vows! Indra said, Thou, O Brahmana, hast attained all the object of
thy desire when thou hast become the excellent priest of the gods, versed in all
the sacred hymns, and hast overreached the influence of death and dotage, what
can Samvarta do to thee now? I am incapable, O king, of counting the descendants
of these, countless as they are, are not much known to fame. O prince, know me
now to have completed my vow.
      For the sake of my friendship for thee, for my affection, and for thy
being an ally,--for these three reasons thou still livest, O Shalya. After
Drupada had ceased, Dhrishtadyumna spoke, saying O bull amongst Brahmanas, O
thou of ascetic wealth, how can, O Brahmana, the elder brother, if he is of a
good disposition, approach the wife of his younger brother? Then the kings of
thy array, O monarch, exerting themselves at their best, accompanied by their
forces, and placing Bhishma at their van, rushed against the Parthas in battle.
O king, the escape, therefore, of the sons of Pandu with life from that
conflagration and their re-appearance, do away with thy evil repute. The son
said, Thou shouldst not, O mother, give expression to such views before thy son.
      With that bow, O king, Indra had vanquished the Daityas. Vyasa said, O
king, O son of Vichitravirya, what thou sayest is true! I shall see that gem
brought to me after the slaughter of that wretch in battle, Placing that gem on
thy head, O king, I shall endure to live. I fear thy penances, O righteous one.
83 84 Sanjaya said, After the slaughter of Duhshasana, O king, ten of thy sons,
heroes that never retreated from battle, all of whom were great car-warriors,
endued with mighty energy, and filled with the poison of wrath, shrouded Bhima
with their shafts.
      Having vanquished him in battle, O king, Uluka proceeded quickly towards
the Pancalas and the Srinjayas and began to slaughter them with sharp shafts. Do
thou, therefore, O Vrihannala, act as the charioteer of my brother. If any
person, O monarch, somehow escapes from diseases, Decrepitude, that destroyer of
beauty, overwhelmshim afterwards. Therefore, O thou of beautiful hips, forsaking
the sons of Pandu, be happy by becoming my wife, and share thou with me the
kingdoms of Sindhu and Sauvira. Sanjaya continued, Thus addressed, O monarch, by
the intelligent son of Dharma, thy son answered him from within the waters in
these words.
      Seeing him prostrate on the Earth, O lord, I took his infant son with me
and have come to thee, desirous of thy protection. Vaisampayana said, Devayani
then, hearing those words of hers, exclaimed, O king, thus, Thou hast wronged
me, O monarch! Or, O Govinda, thou wilt today behold me slain with (Karnas)
arrows. Then the Dundubha, addressing Ruru, said, I have done thee no harm, O
Brahmana! And if any combatants will fight with me in the lists, then Arjuna
replied, O lord of the Earth, I will declare myself as one of the neuter sex.
      That Duryodhana, O Madhava, will behave with justice towards the Pandavas
is what I cannot believe. O mighty-armed one! O Yudhishthira, it is only the
worst of men that utter harsh words in quarrelling; while they that are
indifferent reply to such when spoken by others. O delighter of the Kurus, the
diverse enjoyments we enjoy have all been acquired through thy puissance. For
thy love of me, thou also hadst corroborated it, and, O bull among kings, thou
hadst performed all the rites prescribed for a son in respect of this daughter
of mine!
      Without doubt, O chief of Bharatas race, the ends of mortals are
exceedingly uncertain, since Kunti, who is a princess by birth, is now living in
misery in the woods. Therefore, O king, I desire not to take it. The entire
welkin, O monarch, shrouded with falling swords of great brightness, seemed to
become exceedingly beautiful. How can he accept good counsels, who from folly, O
Janardana, insolently disregarded his own aged sire as also his own well-meaning
mother while speaking beneficial words unto him? O king, let me or thyself have
peace by a single combat.
      O Karna, the slayer of Vana and Bhumis son (Naraka), Vasudeva himself,
who hath, in the thickest of battle, slain foes equal and even superior to thee,
protecteth the diadem-decked Arjuna. The Kalingas, the Magadhas, the Kauravas
the Westerners, the Gandharas have all been slain in dreadful battle, O son of
Pandu! Alas, these heartrending sorrows, due to Duryodhanas acts, many in number
and like unto terrible darts, are now being borne by, me, O Sanjaya! And
Chitrasena and Vikarna and Bhagadatta, O sire, each struck him with ten arrows.
He that striveth after the acquisition of prosperity is, O king, a truly politic
person.
      And barring his father, not a man had ever before been seen by him;
therefore his mind, O protector of men! Do thou, O mighty-armed one, enjoy now
those regions (of felicity) which have become thine through the Rajasuya
sacrifice performed by thee and whose felicities have been enhanced by the
sacrificial scimitar employed by thee. Both of them, O monarch, shot showers of
arrows like showers of rain poured by the clouds in the rainy season. What is
thy pleasure, O thou of sweet smiles. And all the warriors, O king, excited with
wrath, rushed against one another in battle.
      Even the sage, O good Brahmana, whose vow is to do harm to no creature,
doth inflict injury to animal life. O illustrious lord, be inclined to grace. O
scion of Yadus race, O glorious one, if (now) with a pleased mind thou dost
permit me to go to the ascetics retreat in the woods, then thou wouldst compass
what is highly desired by me. Then Dronas son, O monarch, with a straight shaft,
pierced the forehead of Bhimas driver. The Brahmanas gratified with various
kinds of food and enjoyable articles, given away unto them to the extent of
their desires, and with the heaps of jewels distributed amongst them, began to
say,--King Harischandra is superior to all kings in energy and renown.--And
know, O monarch, O bull of the Bharata race, it was for this reason that
Harischandra shone more brightly than thousands of other kings.
      And, O king, the Pandavas passed their days, continuing to gladden the
heart of Draupadi. I tell thee truly, O thou of mighty arms, that having once
seen this lady, other women now seem to me like so many monkeys. Karnas son
also, avoiding Nakula, proceeded quickly, O sire, to where his father, the son
of Radha, was for protecting his car-wheel. Kasyapa said, I go there for wealth,
give it unto me, O snake, so that taking thy gold. Having fallen down, Bhima
addressed king Yudhishthira the just, saying, ‘O king, behold, I who am thy
darling have fallen down.
      Strike now, O tiger among men, or thou wilt be deprived of thy senses.
Look at him, O foremost of men. O crusher of foes, it hath been heard by us that
alms are obtainable in the country of the Panchala, and that Yajnasena, the king
thereof, is devoted to Brahmanas. Tell us not harsh words always, O Vidura. Let
us, O Partha, sport in the waters as we please, in the company of friends.
      And from that day forward, O Kuntis son! Therefore, O monarch, adopt such
counsels that we may not suffer perpetual distress, becoming dependent on others
for our food. And as the Pandava and the Panchala troops (on the one side) and
the Kaurava troops (on the other), O Bharata, were engaged in slaughtering each
other, there arose a furious uproar on the field. Hearing these rebukes from
Krishna, king Duryodhana, O monarch, gave way to wrath and endeavoured to rise.
Those instructions which thou imparted today, desirous of doing good to me, I
shall certainly follow, O lord of Earth.
      Such a person, O king, would obtain that which thou hast obtained. Upon
hearing these words of Arjuna, the Brahmanas and the other orders, O king,
saluting him cheerfully walked round the foremost of virtuous men! Bathing there
and giving away diverse kinds of gifts, Valadeva then proceeded to the tirtha
called Kauvera where the puissant Ailavila, having practised severe austerities,
obtained, O king, the Lordship over all treasures. O thou of mighty arms, who
are they of whom king Vaivaswata is thinking today? Like the great Vaitarani
(separating the regions of life from those of the dead), the field of battle, O
king, became uneven and impassable and unsightly and terrible, in consequence of
steeds and cars and elephants, which struck with Dhananjayas shafts, were
mangled and crushed and cut off in diverse ways.
      Go Then Yudhishthira, filled with wrath, began to destroy thy ranks, in
the sight, O sinless one, of the Pot-born (Drona) and of thy sons. I shall, O
king, be always attentive to that which is agreeable to this Brahmana, and what
is fraught also with good to thee. Then Arjuna, O monarch, covered that hostile
division with showers of straight shafts like a cloud pouring torrents of rain
on a mountain. How then, O bull of Bharatas race, will our purpose be achieved?
By good luck, O lord, it is only after my death that my swelling prosperity
abandons me for waiting upon another!
      Listen, O Bharata, to the names of those illustrious mothers. It behoveth
thee not, therefore, O amiable Queen, to either doubt or censure God or act,
with a foolish heart. Thou, O Vrisha, seemest to be like one that is intoxicated
with spirits. Jaritari said, Thou art, O fire, the soul of air! Yudhishthira
then, O king, with his brothers repaired to that lake from desire of slaying
Duryodhana.
      O bid me do that which may not loosen my ascetic merit. them owning
standards of gold and prepared to struggle vigorously, proceeded with Bhimasena,
and wore the aspect, O monarch, of the denizens of heaven with Indra at their
head. Having been the sire of a king and a king myself, O Sanjaya, how shall I
pass my days as a slave obedient to the commands of Pandus son! No king, O
monarch, could ever acquire the sovereignty of the earth or prosperity or
affluence by means of virtue alone. And O father, virtuous and unswerving from
the path of righteousness and inoffensive to all animated beings as thou wert,
Vaisampayana said, Then on the fourteenth day of the moon, the mighty-souled
Rama at the proper hour showed himself to those members of the priestly caste
and also to the virtuous king (Yudhishthira) and his younger brothers.
      The mother said, All the acts of those that are wise, are (undertaken), O
son, for the sake of virtue and profit. O thou of beautiful thighs, I believe in
my heart that the sun hath no power to set in the usual time, if I am asleep.
But now that he is about to ascend to heaven, whom, O Karna, dost thou think fit
to our commander after him? O Pandava, the observance of virtue is a higher duty
than the protection of life. O Bhishma, praise Drona and Aswatthaman, who both
father and son, are mighty warriors, worthy of praise, and the best of
Brahmanas, and either of whom, O Bhishma, if enraged could annihilate this earth
with its mobile and immobile creatures, as I believe.
      O thou of restrained speech, I think myself unwell, I feel as if my head
is being pierced with numerous darts. And beholding in that conflict Visoka, the
charioteer of Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, O king, became exceedingly cheerless
and almost deprived of his senses. This is my opinion, O Achyuta! This is thy
victory, O lord! As soon, however, as they were created, they ran O king,
towards their sire, afflicted with hunger and desirous of devouring him.
      Why, O king, didst thou not then give us the earth when we, observant of
the rules of righteousness and desirous of the welfare of our race, had begged
thee for our portion? Hearing these words of Drupada, Yudhishthira answered,
saying Be not cheerless, O king; let joy fill thy heart! Therefore prepare thou
O hero of great splendour! With thy shafts reduced, and without quivers, with
thy driver and steeds fatigued, and thyself mangled by foes with weapons, when
thou wilt approach Partha, O son of Radha, thou wilt be an object of derision
and mirth. Those Mlecchas, however, O Janamejaya, in the very sight of Partha,
retreated, taking away with them many foremost ladies of the Vrishnis and
Andhakas.
      12 Section 13 Vaishampayana continued, After he had thus been told
nothing but the truth by Krishna, O monarch, king Dhritarashtra replied unto
Devaki’s son, saying, ‘It is even so, O thou of mighty arms! O handsome lady,
know me as the sister of that chief of the Rakshasa. Cherishing that hope in his
heart, and drawing comfort from it, O Bharata, thy son Duryodhana, relying in
battle upon that mighty car-warrior, the ruler of the Madras, regarded himself
as possessed of a protector. When after Karnas fall the Parthas had uttered
leonine roars, a great fear, O king, had possessed the hearts of the
Dhartarashtras. Prosperity will be thine, O Monarch, if thou behavest well
towards all thy relatives.
      With Vahlikas permission, O prince, Santanu of world-wide fame, on the
death of his father (Pratipa), became king and ruled the kingdom. And, O
Monarch, regarding me as the eldest and entitled to respect, Yudhishthira having
received me respectfully, appointed me in receiving the jewels and gems (that
were brought as tribute). O Charioteer, I seek thy protection. O revered sir,
abandoning me thou mayest obtain another wife. Bhima said, Since, O Visoka, thou
tellest me of Arjunas arrival, I will give thee four and ten populous villages
and a hundred female slaves and twenty cars, being pleased with thee, O Suta,
for this agreeable intelligence imparted by thee!
      Death from disease, O thou of Kurus race, doth not become a Kshatriya!
This death, O son of Pandu, at thy hands, king Yudhishthira will never regard as
an offence committed by thee. O thou of great puissance, I wish to attain, by my
penances, to those regions of felicity which have been acquired by my husband.
Thus addressed by him, they replied unto that royal grinder of foes, saying, O
monarch, the course that is thine, is also ours, O Bharata. Dhritarashtra said,
--Assembled together on the sacred plain of Sanjaya continued,---Thus addressed
by Gudakesa, O Bharata, Hrishikesa, placing that excellent car between the two
armies, in view of Bhishma and Drona and all the kings of the earth, said,--
Behold, O Partha these assembled Kurus,--And there the son of Pritha beheld,
standing (his) sires and grandsons, and friends, and father-in-law and well-
wishers, in both the armies.
      When the light of all the worlds thus disappeared, O sinless one, the
gods then repaired to the Grandsire of the universe. These also, O chief of
Bharatas race, I shall unite with great benefit. O foremost of men, slaying yon
troops, seek battle with yonder bull of Bharatas race. After concluding a
recitation of the Bharata, one should, O king, perform a Homa with all its ten
parts. O bull of Bharatas race, what use is there in telling thee what is really
conducive to thy happiness and good?
      Therefore, O Lord, Bhishma may give me sovereignty by giving me good
counsel, O Madhava. 55 Vaishampayana said, Even thus, O Janamejaya, did that
terrible battle take place. Bhimasena and the great car-warriors among the
Somakas rushed, O monarch, against Kripa, desirous of slaughtering their foes in
battle. And, O king, accept this copper-vessel which I give unto thee. And, O
highly powerful one, O hero, when thou shall give leonine roars, then shall I
with my own, add force to shouts.
      Indeed, O king, Karnas son then slew with his excellent weapons the
beautiful steeds of the delicate Nakula, that were of the Vanayu breed, white in
hue, and decked with trappings of gold. O suppressor of foes, those that have
daughters, from the very nature of their obligations, must say what I say. Know
thou, O best of ascetics, that as he had succeeded in securing the protection of
the Lord of the Celestials, I repaired to him with gratified heart, but he did
not agree to act as my priest. Then the mighty son of Jamadagni began to hurl
celestial weapons at me, all of which I repelled, desirous of achieving mightier
feats, O thou of strong arms, with-my weapons. O best of Brahmanas, nowhere have
I seen many men having one wife.
      How, indeed, Sanjaya said, Beholding Duhsasanas car staying near his, the
son of Bharadwaja, addressing Duhsasana, said these words, Why, O Duhsasana, are
all these cars flying away? And, after him, O first of men, thou hast acquired
this hereditary kingdom of the Kurus for the last thousand years. 2
Vaishampayana said, Listen, O Janamejaya, to the nectar-like words that Vidura
said unto the son of Vicitravirya and by which he gladdened that bull among men!
From this also, O son of Pandu, I have come to know Bhimas might. Having known
all this, O learned one, do what is beneficial.
      But it behoveth thee, O Rishi, to show that love to me which I have for
thee. Vaisampayana continued, Hearing these lamentations expressed in diverse
ways, of that royal sage, the grief, O Janamejaya, of Gandhari, became fresh.
Peace then, O king, will be amongst our gladdened selves. And, O son of Pandu,
he that fasteth three nights upon only one meal without a second during this
period goeth into a region free from disease and anxiety. That slayer of foes,
Karna, O Sanjaya, is the prosperity, the armour, the fame, and the very hope of
life, of the Kurus.
      Reposing the cares of thy state on Dussasana, Durvisaha, Karna, and
Suvalas son, thou desirest the continuance of thy prosperity, O Bharata. But, O
thou of the Kuru race, Pradyumna sailed out, and, O great king, bidding the
Anarttas be of good cheer, said, Waver ye not, and staying behold me fight I
Even I shall, by force, repell that car with Salwa on it! Turvasu replied, I do
not like decrepitude, O father, it takes away all appetites and enjoyments,
strength and beauty of person, intellect, and even life. The warriors, O king,
thus urged by Bhimasena and the prince of the Panchalas, smothered the Kauravas,
becoming reckless of their very lives. Then, O sire, he cut off at the handle
the bow, with arrow fixed on it, of Satyaki and then despatched the four steeds
of the latter to Yamas abode.
      A fierce battle took place there, O Bharata, in which the combatants
struck one another with fists or seized one anothers hair or wrestled with one
another with bare arms. Then, O king, the royal son of Dharma, in that dreadful
battle, quickly cut off with a razor-headed arrow one of the protectors of
Shalyas car-wheels. Then, O king, the gods with Brahma at their head and Rishis
endued with the wealth of asceticism moved by the act of Mankanaka, represented
the matter to Mahadeva, saying, It behoveth thee, O god, to act in such a way
that this Rishi may not dance. O son, except the thunder-bolt alone, tell me
what it is that thou desirest to have! Thou always residest, O god, in the
Ocean, that home of makaras!
      O thou of the fairest complexion, on what business hast thou come hither
and whence hast thou come? Offer him, however, O king, that hospitality which is
the most agreeable to that illustrious one deserving of every respect, for there
is no respect that may not be offered to Janardana. And, O sinless one, hundreds
of other heroic (Rakshasas), capable of moving through the sky, and of assuming
any shape at will, will together carry you all with the Brahmanas. Bhima said, I
will, O timid one, do even as thou sayest. O Pandava, beholding that foremost of
warriors, Sahadeva, engaged in tending kine, and sleeping at night on calf-
skins, how can I bear to live?
      Vaisampayana said, Hearing those words of Dhritarashtra, Sakuni, when the
opportunity presented itself, aided by Kama, spoke unto Duryodhana these words,
Having exiled the heroic Pandavas by thy own prowess, O Bharata, rule thou this
earth without a rival like the slayer of Samvara ruling the heaven! fierce
battle between thy troops and theirs, O Bharata, at that dreadful hour of
midnight, increasing the population of Yamas kingdom. From good fortune also,
these two, Bhima and Dhananjaya, are well and arrived, O Bharata, it their own
city unwounded. These beneficial and excellent words, fraught with reason, that
thou, O mighty-armed one, hast said do not seem acceptable to me, O foremost of
Brahmanas. Having reached the banks of the Dvaipayana lake, O chief of Kurus
race, they beheld that receptacle of waters enchanted by thy son.
      The treasury and the ministers of state, O king, are at this moment under
our control. Wait for me a little, O Yaja! Seeing that warrior of great
proficiency in battle, Bharadwajas son of great wisdom, with eyes expanded in
joy, quickly came towards Kripa, and addressing him said, as if crushing (by
that speech of his) the very vitals of thy son, O Bharata, the following words,
Yonder cometh the youthful son of Subhadra at the head of the Parthas,
delighting all his friends, and king Yudhishthira, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and
Bhimasena, the son of Pandu, and all his kinsmen, and relatives by marriage, and
all who are watching the battle as spectators Dhritarashtra said, A mere child
in years, brought up in great luxury, proud of the strength of his arms,
accomplished in battle, endued with great heroism, the perpetuator of his race,
and prepared to lay down his life--when Abhimanyu penetrated into the Katirava
army, borne on his three-years old steeds of spirited mettle, was there any of
great warriors, in Yudhishthiras army, that followed the son of Arjuna? Hearing,
O monarch, these words of mine now, proceed, O Partha, against that mighty car-
warrior, the ruler of the Madras. The delight that I feel, O thou of great
beauty, on hearing from thee about my coming encounter with Kichaka, is equal to
what I felt in slaying Hidimva.
      That, however, O learned one, which I shall say, for inspiring thy
confidence is fraught with self-adulation. O thou illustrious one, ask the boon
that thou mayst desire. Vaisampayana said, Having spoken thus unto the king,
(Kuvera) said unto Bhimasena, O child, O best of the Kurus, I do not mind this,
O Bhima, as in order to please Krishna, thou hast, disregarding the gods and me
also, committed this rash act, namely, the destruction of the Yakshas and the
Rakshasas, depending on the strength of thy arms, I am well-pleased with thee.
It was for thy good, O chief of men, that Bhishma, firmly devoted to truth,
himself told thee the means of his death in battle, and was slain by the heroic
and high-souled Shikhandi, the son of Drupada, protected by me. Renounce thy
grief, O mighty sovereign.
      But, O Sakra, I feel greater compassion for one that is weak and
innocent! Go, O mighty-armed one! Then, O king, that foremost of men, the
blessed king Nala began to soothe horses endued with energy and strength. A
little while after, O Bharata, that best of monarchs, deprived of all his senses
by the Rakshasa within him, beholding Saktri who had cursed him, said, Because
thou hast pronounced on me this extraordinary curse, therefore, I shall begin my
life of cannibalism by devouring thee. O ruler of men, I desire to smell thy
head.
      O thou resplendent as Agni, thou burnest all even as Surya in his anger
burneth all creatures. The unfading Brahma, soothing him by soft words, said
unto him, O Sharva, what wert thou doing so long within the water? O best of
men, what ye see before you, of vast proportions like unto a mountain and
beautiful as the Kailasa cliff, is a collection of the bones of the mighty
Daitya Naraka, Being placed on a mountain, it looketh like one. Stupefied by
grief, they now, O king, refrained from even casting their eyes upon each other.
O Janaka, thou hearest my words as if thou hast been stupefied in consequence of
having eaten the fruit of the Sleshmataki tree.
      O excellent Brahmana, tell me all this in full as everything had
happened. Meanwhile Dhananjaya, O lord, proceeding against thy car-force,
twanged his bow Gandiva celebrated over the three worlds. And, O Pandava, the
Gandharvas and the Apsaras also divert themselves in this lake. O child, he is a
true man upon whom favours are never lost. And, O Bhima, hark unto the notes of
the peacocks crying with their hens on the mountain slopes.
      Those two who were regarded as Atirathas amongst the foremost of the
Vrishnis, and referring to whom in course of conversation thou wert wont to
indulge in pride, and who, O chief of Kuru’s race, were ever dear to Krishna
himself—alas, those two, O Dhananjaya, have been the chief causes of the
destruction of the Vrishnis! Hearing Indras words, the celestials said unto
their chief of a 1,000 eyes, Stop the royal sage, O Shakra by granting him a
boon, if thou canst! And at thy command, O king, let plenty of ornaments of pure
gold be given unto Draupadi. When I live in the order of the Gandharvas, I then,
O son of Bhrigus race, act in every respect as a Gandharva. I tell thee truly, O
hero, that the Pandavas united with the Somakas are no match for thee in battle!
      Those amongst the soldiers against whom the eldest Pandava proceeded,
were overthrown by him, O king, like mountain summits riven with thunder.
Vaisampayana continued, Then on the occasion of an almsgiving, O king, Kunti fed
on a certain night a large number of Brahmanas. Having thyself established the
unrivalled city of Indraprastha of the splendour of Kailasa itself, where dost
thou go, leaving it, O illustrious and just king, O achiever of extraordinary
deeds! O protector of men! Sakuni said, O son of the Kuru race, you have just
heard what Kama hath said.
      O ruler of men, thou alone of all the world, yielding to thy son whom no
restraints can blind, hadst regarded thyself as crowned with success and
abstained from avoiding dispute at the time of the match at dice. O Karna, act
according to the words of thy mother. Thinking of and seeing his feats in
battle, O Phalguna, I lose my energies in grief. Let this plan recommend itself
to thee, O slayer of foes. Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed by the king, Puru
answered with humility, I shall do, O monarch, as thou bidest me.
      But Vidura, O king, in the name of Dhritarashtra repeatedly enquired with
great affection after their welfare. Besides, O king, Ashvatthama succeeded in
accomplishing the feat only because the men were all asleep. And, O holder of
the mace and the discus. And, O bull of Bharatas race, the mighty-armed Bhishma,
O king, with his standard which was made of silver and graced with the device of
the palmyra with five stars, setting upon his great car, shone like the lunar
orb under the peak of Meru. And, O bull among the twice-born, in this region
that is superior to all, none can live that is unamiable, or of unbridled
passions, or unrighteous.
      Endued with great effulgence, Varuna, the highly blessed son of Aditi,
had in days of yore performed in that tirtha the Rajasuya sacrifice, O lord of
Earth! And, O monarch, king Duryodhana beholding that vast wealth in the
Rajasuya sacrifice and having become the victim of those numerous errors within
the assembly house at last returned, with the leave of the Pandavas, to
Hastinapore. Ulupi, the daughter of the Naga chief, O thou of Kunti’s race,
entered the waters of Ganga. And, O Bharata. O tell me of each as he was
possessed of prowess and achievements.
      Alas, my son, O Sanjaya, did not listen to those words! Where, O foremost
of men, hath that pride and that sense of honour which thou hadst now gone,
since, O king, thou hast enchanted these waters and art now lying within them? I
shall not, however, O Savyasachin, discover thee to my father, as long as thou
wilt not tell me to do it. O Bharata, the limit and the like of the excellent
and invaluable jewels that were brought there have not been seen. O auspicious
lady, I do not behold any one that may assist as their re-establishment and
growth.
      Thou, O Govinda, also knowest fully, and all things in details, both
religion and profit. Thus addressed by him, Janardana answered with a smile,--O
best of kings, these words can come from thee alone! Do not, O Madhava, give way
to grief! See, O Matali, if any bridegroom may be had here, acceptable to thee.
O ruler of Chedi, Bhishma knoweth Krishna truly.
      Tell me, O foremost of regenerate ones, I am never satiated with
listening to the grand feats of my ancestors. What other friend have we, O
Krishna, who like thee is so dear to us, who seeketh our welfare so, who is so
conversant with the course of all actions, and who is so well-acquainted with
truth? O scorcher of foes, seeing the son of Kunti pass, having pierced through
this host, those warriors that are protecting Jayadratha have become doubtful
(of their ability to resist Partha). O mighty-armed one, it is thy duty to
dispel, by all means in thy power, the wrath of Gandhari! Yudhishthira said, I
ask thee, O foremost of regenerate ones, listen to what I have to say.
      O, give me leave to sacrifice myself, and cherish thou my children.
Without rain, however, O son of Kunti, is never yieldeth crops. And since the
Sarasvati, in consequence of such contempt, is lost at that spot, the Rishis,
for that reason, O chief of the Bharatas, always name the place as Vinasana.
Bhishma said, What is the use of thy talking, O Radhas son? Those high-souled
ones, O king, said unto Baladeva, Listen in detail, O Rama, as to whose asylum
this was in days of yore!
      Tell me truly, O thou that mowest down thy foes. When thou shouldst joy
and reward the Pandavas, thou art grieving, O king? Through their acts they
obtain heaven, O Bharata, or bliss, or woe. In consequence of the transgressions
of monarchs, Brahmanas, O foremost of kings, became the cause of evil to them,
as Chyavana had become, in consequence of the act of Sukanya. The mighty car-
warrior Sushena, however, O king, piercing Nakula with ten shafts, quickly cut
off the latters bow with a razor-headed arrow.
      And, O Bharata, while speaking thus, Nala oppressed with grief, could not
restrain his tears, but began to weep. After hearing thy words, however, that
heart, O Janardana, hath again become steady. O blessed lady, polygamy is not
fault with men. O sinless one, the highspirited Yavakri finding that his father,
who practised asceticism, was slighted by the Brahmanas, while Raivya with his
sons was greatly respected by them, was overwhelmed with sorrow, and became sore
aggrieved. The serpent said, O king, if thou recognise him as a Brahmana by
characteristics, then, O long-lived one, the distinction of caste becometh
futile as long as conduct doth not come into play.
      O, let her grace my spacious and beautiful palace, decked with various
ornaments of gold, full of viands and drinks in profusion, with excellent
plates, and containing every kind of plenty, besides elephants and horses and
cars in myriads. O Kichaka, hast thou no sense which leads thee to seek thy good
and by which thy life may be saved? Yudhishthira said,--I have, O son of Suvala,
immeasurable kine and horses and milch cows with calves and goats and sheep in
the country extending from the Parnasa to the eastern bank of the Sindu. Let, O
Vidura, large pavilions be constructed, rich with food and drink of diverse
tastes collected in profusion. Then, O Bharata, I could once more see the
diverse single combats that the combatants fought at noon of day, each according
to his strength and his rank, all of which were exceedingly fierce.
      Whether thou accomplishest it now or afterwards, that feat, O sire,
should be accomplished by thee. O lord, a knowledge of the Vedas as learnt
through teachers, is acquired in a long time. The fame, O king, of all righteous
men hath righteousness for its basis! Since thou art truthful, therefore, O
high-minded lady, do I appear in thy sight. The three brothers then, O monarch,
did as settled.
      4 Neither I, O son, nor Kritavarma, will ever retreat from battle without
having vanquished the Pandavas! O son of Kurus race, if thou regainest thy
natural disposition, the earth may continue to be peopled as now. Take
everything else, O Bharata, of which thou standest in need! Intent on
Yudhishthiras good, having slain many foremost of warriors, the brave Satyaki,
skilled in weapons, is coming to thee, O Phalguna! Assembling together the
remnant of his cars which still numbered many hundreds, as also his elephants
and horse and foot, O scorcher of foes, thy son said these words unto those
warriors, Encountering all the Pandavas with their friends and allies, in this
battle, and the prince of Pancala also with his own troops, and slaying them
quickly, turn back from the fight!
      That object also, cherished in thy heart, for the attainment of which
thou strivest, O auspicious one, shall, O thou of beautiful face, be
accomplished for thee! For these thirteen years, O Dhananjaya, we have, from
hope, lived relying on thee, like seeds sown on earth in expectation of the
showers sent by the gods in season! Thy gifts have, therefore, gratified the
deities highly, O best of regenerate ones. After this, the Kuru king Pandu,
taking counsel with the great Rishis commanded Kunti to observe an auspicious
vow for one full year, while he himself commenced, O Bharata, to stand upon one
leg from morning to evening, and practise other severe austerities with mind
rapt in meditation, for gratifying the lord of the celestials. As soon as these
words were spoken, O Bharata, jackals and other carnivorous animals began to
howl ominously And marking those frightful omens all around, the assembled
Brahmanas and the wise Vidura replied, O king, O bull among men, when these
frightful omens are noticeable at the birth of thy eldest son, it is evident
that he shall be the exterminator of thy race.
      It was then that his forefathers of whom Richika was the first having
arrived there addressed him thus, O Rama, O blessed Rama, O offspring of Bhrigu,
we have been gratified with the reverence thou hast shown for thy ancestors and
with thy valour, O mighty one! Presuming upon his being a favourite of the king,
Kichaka, O Bharata, hath enhanced my woe. I do not behold, O Bhishma, the king
that is equal in battle unto Drona or Aswatthaman. Shrouded with the arrows of
Sinis grandson, thy army, O monarch, fled away on all sides with great speed,
and fell down deprived of life. Vrihaspati said, Having, O Marutta, acted as
priest to the Immortals, how can I act as such to mortal men, and whether thou
dost depart hence or stay, I tell thee, I have ceased to act as priest to any
but the Immortals.
      O Sakra, it is not proper for me to confer on thee any unprofitable boon,
for thou art the very lord of the celestials! No longer beholding him who by his
energy first burnt all hostile troops whom I afterwards despatched with shafts
sped from Gandiva, I am filled with grief and my head swims, O best of men.
Abandoning wrath and enmity, O chastiser of foes, let these kings, embracing one
another in peace, eating and drinking with one another, dressed in excellent
robes and decked with garlands, and doing courtesies to one another, return to
their respective homes. What need have I of kingdom or of articles of enjoyment,
what need of sacrifices or of happiness, when thou, O king, hast undergone go
much affliction? It was after this, O king, that the sons of Pandu, those great
car-warriors, encountered the son of Drona, and putting forth their prowess,
vanquished him, O monarch, (in the way already related).
      Then Prativindhya, O Bharata, cutting off with his shafts the bow of his
antagonist deeply struck the latter with five keen arrows. And his practice of
austerities, O subduer of foes, was rigid and terrible and of an exceedingly
severe character. O thou of great splendour, know, O Dhananjaya, that Karna, his
dart being baffled through Ghatotkacha, is already slain hurl that fatal dart at
Dhananjaya? Having in battle subjugated both men and celestials and Gandharvas
and Rakshasas, Varuna, O king, that slayer of hostile heroes, performed his
grand sacrifice in that tirtha. And after the mouse had gone, the wolf, O king,
came there having performed his ablutions.
      Know them all, O Krishna, that did thee any injury while thou wert
afflicted, to have already gone to the abode of Yama. Neither the gods nor the
Danavas are capable of staying within the range of thy weapons, O son of Drona,
slay the Panchalas and the Somakas with all their followers. And, O king, that
lotus-eyed lady then in due course of time brought forth a son of the splendour
of a celestial child and of eyes like-lotus-petals. And, O monarch, beholding
Duryodhana thus offer him a slight by scratching the earth silently, Maitreya
became angry. Their eyes filled with tears, and hearts inspired with fear, they
became, O king, melancholy an cheerless, and destitute of While the troops,
deprived of energy, were thus flying away with speed, only Dronas son,
Aswatthaman, like a huge alligator coming up against the current of a stream,
rushed against his foes.
      All of them, abandoning other kinds of food, observe vows and
regulations, and take at due seasons the fruits of that lord of the forest for
their sustenance and wander in separate bands, unseen by men, O foremost of
human beings! When, O son of Bhrigus race, I live in the order of the deities, I
then verily act in every respect as a deity. Ashtaka said, How, O father, do men
attain to those superior regions whence there is no return to earthly life? O
king, during those days even robbers and cheats never spoke lies amongst
themselves, nor they that were the favourites of the monarch. Whatever, O mighty
one, he purposeth to do is incapable of being frustrated by anybody by every
means in his power.
      I shall narrate to thee the story of the investiture of Kumara and the
prowess of that high-souled one, since, O ruler of men thou wishest to hear it!
And Dhritarashtra hearing the ill news of the success of the Pandavas and
recollecting the resolutions of Duryodhana, Kama, and Sakuni, pondered for a
while and addressed to Sanjaya the following speech:-- Hear, O Sanjaya, all that
happened thereupon and came to my knowledge. If thou overthrowest Nahusha, then
we shall be entitled to our shares of sacrificial offerings, O Indra. There is
only one person, Karna, who will slay the Pandavas along with the Srinjayas--
even this is what Duryodhana, O Suta, used very often to say unto me. Those
steeds, fleet as the wind, thus urged, O tiger among men, proceeded with great
speed.
      That tiger among car-warriors, therefore, remembering his old hostility,
will, O sire, fight with the Pandavas in battle, reckless of his very life which
is so difficult to lay down. Like the Grandsire holding the reins of Rudras
steeds, do thou hold, without delay, the reins of Karnas steeds in battle, O
thou of great splendour. What, O lord, was the cause of the dispute between
Vasishtha and Vishvamitra? And, O thou who delightest in the observance of vows,
O illustrious one, knowing everything yet influenced by paternal affection, I am
unable to cast off my senseless son, Duryodhana! O lord, divesting themselves of
armour.
      And approaching the king, she addressed him in these words, O mighty
armed king, listen, O Lord, to these words of mine. It behoveth thee not, O son,
to afflict me after this. No one that is acquainted with the distinctions of
morality would act in the way, O Dhananjaya, in which thou, O son of Pandu, that
art unacquainted with them, art acting today! Meanwhile the high-souled
Pandavas, O thou of Kuru’s race, and Draupadi of great fame, having observed the
preliminary fast, set out with their faces towards the east. Then ten car-
warriors among the Pancalas, O monarch, surrounded Karna.
      O handsome one, it behoveth thee with thy child to show us mercy.
Similarly, the Pandava host, O king, began to be slaughtered in hundreds and
thousands in that battle by thy sons on every side with their arrows. When
Vrishasena, however, had deprived Nakula of his steeds, O Bharata, thou
quaffedst in battle the blood from Duhshasana’s body! Vrihadaswa said, O king, O
thou that never fallest off, listen attentively with thy brothers, I will
narrate the history of a prince more miserable than thyself. Consider also, O
king, how while out on his campaign of conquest, O king, thus admonished by
Maitreya, Duryodhana began to slap his thigh resembling the trunk of the
elephant, and smilingly began to scratch the ground with his foot.
      Considering all this, and remembering too that sacrifice of thy own self
is censurable, O, liberate today without loss of time thy own self, thy race,
and these thy children (by abandoning me). Both Nakula and Sahadeva, O Bharata,
are fatigued, having fought with the wretched Dhartarashtras and their
followers! Mounting on that foremost of elephants, O monarch, he proceeded
against the Pandavas and began to pierce them on all sides with keen and
terrible shafts that resembled Indras thunder in force. When Drupadas daughter
endued with such a disposition, doth not enjoy uninterrupted happiness, it
seemeth, O Govinda, that the happiness one enjoyeth is never the fruit of ones
acts. How, when all of you were together, could the mighty king of the Madras,
as also my son, be slain, O Sanjaya, by the Pandavas?
      Having done all that he should have done, the pupil, O perpetuator of
Kurus race, attained to that seat repairing whither one has not to grieve. The
Brahmana said, In this connection is cited the ancient story, O blessed one, of
what the institution is of the seven sacrificing priests. Let prosperity be ever
with thee, O Partha, and do thou obtain victory in battle. But, O Lord, there is
one thing that we desire to be done by thee. Vaisampayana said, O Bharata,
Kotikakhya related to those princes who had been waiting, all that had passed
between him and Krishna.
      Deer and buffaloes and birds, O monarch, in large numbers, placed thy
army to their right, O king. In this treatise, called Bharata, O foremost one of
Bharata’s race, are to be seen in one place the eternal Rudras, the Saddhyas,
and the Viswedevas; the Adityas, the two deities named the Ashvinis, the regents
of the World, the great Rishis, the Guhyakas, the Gandharvas, the Nagas, the
Vidyadharas, the Siddhas, the diverse deities, the Self-born visible in a body,
with many ascetics; the Hills and Mountains, Oceans and Seas and Rivers, the
diverse tribes of Apsaras; the Planets, the Years, the Half-years, and the
Seasons; and the whole universe of mobile and immobile entities, with all the
gods and Asuras. The (Kaurava) troops are all tired, O sire! Do thou (now), O
highly powerful one, decrease thyself by thy own power. And, O monarch, herself
clad in a piece of red cloth, and wearing matted locks, and covered with dirt
and dust, Damayanti then addressed Vahuka, saying, O Vahuka, hast thou ever seen
any person acquainted with duty, who hath gone away, deserting his sleeping wife
in the forest?
      It seems to me, O Brahmana, that the cause could not be a light one, for
it was Janardana of immeasurable soul who had himself to make the journey! 22
Sanjaya said, That foremost of car-warriors, O monarch, thy son, riding on his
car and filled with the courage of despair, looked resplendent in that battle
like Rudra himself of great valour. And let him, ye best of immortals, stay Know
also, O monarch, that the mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna was a portion of
Agni. I will even take thee, O thou of agreeable smiles, with me to my capital.
Tell me what is in thy heart Smiling in modesty, she said to him, Give me, O
best of celestials, a child endued with great strength and largeness of limbs
and capable of humbling the pride of every body.
      O king, making the slender-waisted Draupadi, who is even such as my
stake, I will play with thee, O son of Suvala. O son of Kurus race, today thou
art not competent to give away the earth! The preceptor, O monarch, is eagerly
solicitous of seizing thee. Having laid my commands over the whole Earth and
having stayed over the heads of all, O Sanjaya, how shall I live now as a slave
in wretchedness? O lady, we wish to be restored to sight.
      Therefore, O Dushmanta, support thy son and insult not Sakuntala. And, O
Bharata, that chastiser of all foes having thus caused Jarasandha to be slain,
took leave of Yudhishthira and Pritha, and Draupadi and Subhadra, and Bhimasena
and Arjuna and the twins Nakula and Sahadeva. Describe them to me, O son of
Gavalgana, once more! Vaisampayana said, It hath been heard by us, O monarch,
that what thou askest is a mystery even to the gods. Then thou wilt get, O scion
of Bharatas race!
      Tell me all this in detail, O great Muni! It seemed as if the three
pursuits--virtue, pleasure, and profit--became personified on earth, and amongst
them the king shone as After a few days, Vibhatsu, addressing Krishna, said, The
summer days have set in, O Krishna! If thou understandest what I have said, and
if all I have said appears proper and sufficient, then, O Sanjaya, muster thy
patience and gird up thy lions for victory. Having reflected for a moment, the
Grandsire, ever mindful of the welfare of the gods, bestowed upon him the status
of a generalissimo among all creatures, O Bharata! If thou knowest everything,
do thou then, O girl of slender waist, tell me whether what I saw was only a
dream or a reality!
      Listen, O fool, to these words of mine: thither is victory where
righteousness is. O virtuous man, it is proper that thou shouldst see my father
and my mother. I shall destroy also thy hope of sovereignty, O king, and pay off
all thy misdeeds unto the sons of Pandu! I ask thee, O Duryodhana, O foremost of
the Bharata race, desist from hostility. The reciter, O chief of the Bharatas,
should be possessed of learning and endued with a good voice and a clear
utterance respecting both letters and words.
      Accompanied and protected, O sire, by him in battle, the feats that
Partha achieve are all before thee. Having vanquished in battle the brave
mountaineers, who were all great warriors, the son of Pandu, O king, then
occupied with the help of his troops, the town protected by the Puru king. O
bull among men, we are competent to bring them thus under our sway. Tell me all
this, O Sanjaya. And, O exalted one, the eighteen tribes of the Bhojas, from
fear of Jarasandha, have all fled towards the west; so also have the Surasenas,
the Bhadrakas, the Vodhas, the Salwas, the Patachchavas, the Susthalas, the
Mukuttas, and the Kulindas, along with the Kuntis.
      I am now once more calm, O Sanjaya, therefore, tell me how this slaughter
of heroes is going on, having my evil policy for its cause. Smeared with white
sandal-paste, O king, Baladeva, repairing to that tirtha, duly gave away wealth
unto many ascetics of cleansed souls. O holy one, it behoveth thee to tell me
all this accurately, O sinless one,--even thus was I interrogated by that
learned Brahmana, O Madhava. Some had swords and mallets and some were armed
with bludgeons, O Bharata. Through the fault of those two heroes who were thy
dear disciples and who were much regarded by thee, also, O Partha, the Vrishnis
have been destroyed.
      O thou of the Bhrigu race, this wound rankled deep in the Rakshasas mind
and he thought the present moment very opportune for carrying the lady away. And
while Bhishma was thus speaking, Karna wrathfully and insolently interrupted his
words, and looking at Duryodhana said, There is no creature in the world, O
Brahmana, who is not informed of all these facts. And in that battle, O king,
which was destructive of great heroes, when Bhishma and Dhananjaya the son of
Pandu put forth their prowess, thy sons, O monarch, beholding the grandsire
exert himself vigorously, approached him, with all their troops placed ahead.
these, O mighty monarch, purify a person of meritorious acts. Why dost thou
today, O Kichaka, solicit me so persistently even as a sick person wisheth for
the night that will put a stop to his existence?
      Thus addressed the mountain suddenly began to increase from wrath,
desirous, O chastiser of foes, of obstructing the path of the Sun and the Moon.
Thither, O chief of the celestials, perform a sacrifice! And, O thou of the
Dasarha race, it behoveth thee, O thou of mighty arms, to grant me permission to
celebrate a sacrifice along with thee and my younger brothers. Unto the reciter,
O king of men, gift of land should be made. Good betide thee, O bull among men,
it seems that they have perished without leaving a mark behind.
      Alas, I have to see thee worn out with fasts, O thou that art the
delighter of all thy kinsmen. Vaisampayana said, Hearing these words of Vidura,
Drupada said, It is Hearing this, Yudhishthira said, We are now, O monarch, with
all our younger brothers, dependent on thee. Thus addressed, Vidura, repeatedly
trembling, slowly dismissed the ladies, O bull of Bharatas race. Like a child
wishing to have the moon, seekest thou, O fool, to do what cannot be done by the
very gods, headed by Vasava with all their strength? Dhritarashtra, said,
Describe to me, O Sanjaya, the diverse kinds of standards resplendent with great
beauty, of both the Partha and our warriors (in that battle).
      And, O my boy, they assume lovely forms and try to allure by diverse
means. Without doubt, O Suyodhana, I am the destroyer of all the sons of
Dhritarashtra, as Abhimanyu is of all the (younger) princes! Let Vrihaspati
(therefore) officiate as priest to that Mahendra the supreme Deva (god), the
highest one wielding the thunderbolt, and O prince, Samvarta will act as my
priest, as neither his (Indras) words, nor thine commend themselves to me. There
is no path, O monarch, that is better than the duty of battle. If, however, O
thou of Bhrigus race, the desire is entertained by thee of leaving this place,
do thou go without delay, receiving my permission.
      After this, O king, if thou wishest to hear words that are agreeable to
thee, in respect of all acts good or bad, ask thou women and idiots and cripples
or persons of that description. O child, safely go thou blest by my prayers. Let
thy mind always take a pleasure in such righteousness as is involved, O king of
kings, in thy desire of bestowing such a high boon on us. This, in my opinion,
is not Heaven.’ The gods said, ‘If thou longest to be there, go then, O son,
without delay. Hath this, O son of Pritha, been heard by thee with mind
undirected to any other objects?
      With patience and great strength, O monarch, the king of the Madras at
the same time fought with the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), each of whom
resembled the Destroyer himself in prowess. Assuredly, O Bharata Vishnu hath
been desirous of taking back unto himself the energy that existeth in this
Sisupala. Thou, O Karna, art not born in the Suta order. Thou wilt, O Krishna,
say unto Suyodhana such words as are for our benefit. Thy sire got back his
life-breaths, O king.
      The man, O king, who has restrained his senses and subdued wrath and
covetousness, who is contented, and truthful in speech, succeeds in obtaining
peace. Then Kritavarma, O king, in that encounter, suddenly pierced Uttamauja in
the chest, at which the latter sat down on the terrace of his car. Salya said,
This thy wish, O Yudhishthira, shall be accomplished, O son of Kunti. Sanjaya
said, Beholding Dhananjaya, that slayer of foes, lying weeping at his feet, O
bull of Bharatas race, king Yudhishthira the just raised his brother. Tell me, O
Grandsire, what I should do in view of this.
      Vrihaspati said, Thou art the mouth, O Agni, of all the gods. Follow his
counsels, O, monarch. Is Krishna superior to thee in might of arms, O king? For
the extent of its waters, O Karna, what is a crow to it? O Kaurava, his feelings
towards us are otherwise.
      Beholding the vehicle thus reduced to ashes, O lord, the sons of Pandu
became filled with wonder, and Arjuna, O king, having saluted Krishna and bowed
unto him, said these words, with joined hands and in an affectionate voice, O
Govinda, O divine one, for what reason hath this car been consumed by fire? And
Nahusha said, Let it be so, O lady of lovely hips, even as thou art telling me.
Therefore, O Sutas son, do thou perform those sacrifices. For the sake of
virtue, of profit, of happiness, make peace, O king, and do not allow the Earths
population to be slaughtered, regarding evil as good and good as evil. O
illustrious dame, we came hither in great anxiety.
      Beaten and pierced by Bhimasena, those Krodhavasas quitted the field of
battle, and in confusion quickly fled towards the Kailasa cliff, supporting
Vaisampayana said, Then, O best of the Bharatas, Bhima began to collect those
rare unearthly, variegated and fresh flowers in abundance. Possessed of sure aim
and skilled in smiting, the Pandavas, O monarch, not seeing in battle
Duryodhana, who was then concealed, (were resting in their camp). Women seemed
to look like men, and men to look like women at that hour, O king, when thy son
Duryodhana fell! Gangas son knoweth not that weapon; nor Drona nor Gautama
(Kripa); nor Dronas son, O king! Sanjaya said, After the forenoon of that day, O
Bharata, had passed away, and the sun in his westward course had passed a
portion of his path, and after the high-souled Pandavas had won the victory, thy
sire Devavrata, conversant with the distinction of all codes of morality, rushed
carried by the fleetest steeds, towards the army of the Pandavas, protected by a
large force and by all thy sons.
      O son of Gautamas daughter, thy regard for us is great. They are equal to
those of Hariscandra, O son of Pritha. 13 14 Sanjaya said, Srutakarman then, O
king, filled with wrath, struck that lord of Earth, viz., Citrasena, in that
battle, with fifty shafts. Yama, thus employed in that sacrifice, did not
(during that period), O king, kill a single human being. And, O son of the
Bharata race, when I am near, and Drona and Bhishma and thou too, nothing evil
that even Fate might have ordained is likely to happen.
      And from this circumstance O king, he hath been celebrated as Karandhama.
And, O king, thou shalt also, with thy brothers, obtain great happiness.
Perceiving him staying on the field, thy son, O bull of Bharatas race, seeing
his own army running away, rallied them with great courage. O, tell me this, for
thou art, in my judgment endued with intelligence. Do thou, tell me about them,
O thou of unfading glory.
      Thus answered, Dhritarashtras son again said unto Janardana, It behoveth
thee not, O Kesava, to behave towards us in this way, Whether thou becomest
successful, or unsuccessful, we are endeavouring to please thee, O slayer of
Madhu, because of thy relationship with us. Desist, O king, it will not be
otherwise. Dhritarashtra said, O delighter of the Kurus, my mind is fixed, O
son, on penances. Krishna then met the deities and (celestial) Rishis and
Charanas, O king, and the foremost ones among the Gandharvas and many beautiful
Apsaras and Siddhas and Saddhyas. Sanjaya continued, While they were discoursing
thus, O king, the Pandava divisions appeared for battle.
      O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, do not say so about king Duryodhana. Thou
shouldst, however, O son of Pritha, always fight with care with the son of
Dhritarashtra! Then, O king, the Pandavas with joined hands said unto the Rishi,
So be it. The plan they formed, O scorcher of foes, was to take Trita with them,
and calling upon all their Yajamanas and collecting the needful number of
animals, they would joyfully drink the Soma juice and acquire the great merits
of sacrifice. Indeed, those loud-sounding instruments were blown and beaten, O
king, among both the armies.
      If in the Dwaita woods thou hadst said unto me, O king, I shall not be
able to fight with Karna, we would then, O Partha, have made other arrangements
suitable to the circumstances. Here did Mandhata himself, of a mighty bow,
perform sacrificial rites for the gods; and so did Somaka, O Kuntis son! Then
the Prabhadrakas, O king, and the Somakas, were seen felled or falling by
thousands, in consequence of Shalyas arrows. For this, O thou of wicked
understanding, thou deservest not to be slain with any weapon! Having enquired
into the truth regarding him, if, O lord, I obtain no news of him, then I shall
visit thee; this tell I thee for truth.
      And Takshaka answered, I am that Takshaka, O Brahmana, who shall burn
that lord of the earth. Then, O king, the Kauravas, mustering all their
divisions, rushed against the Pandava army. But thou, O son of Kunti, dost
neither desire to recall thy sorrows nor thy happiness; what else dost thou
desire to recall barring this delusion of sorrow? Indeed, the Pandavas, inspired
with desire of victory, O monarch, careered beautifully on all sides amongst thy
divisions. He, O king, is fit to be thy son-in-law and the husband of thy
daughter.
      Go, O Partha, and slay Karna. Indeed, uttering such harsh words, thou,
without any reason, findest fault with me alone, addressed regardfully as thou
always art by the sons of Pritha, O slayer of Madhu. Catching it as it coursed
towards him, the high-souled king Citra, O Bharata, hurled the very weapon at
Prativindhya. And, O king of kings, the lord together with his brothers,
worshipped Rama, and, O most righteous of the rulers of men, the very highest
honours were paid by him to all those members of the twice-born class. And, O
king of men!
      O king, that kingdom of thine which, abounding in prosperity, have before
been taken by him at dice! Do thou, O mighty being, take the leadership of the
celestial forces accordingly. All the Kshatriyas, O king, proceeded with great
speed towards that lake called Dvaipayana. Pushan gave him, O Bharata, two
companions, Panitraka and Kalika, both endued with great powers of illusion.
Vaisampayana continued, Dwelling in the woods, O bull of the Bharata race, the
high-souled Pandavas spent one and ten years in a miserable plight.
      O thou of lair looks, it behoveth thee to raise offspring, at my command,
through some Brahmana possessed of high ascetic merit. I desire to hear
everything, O Kshatta; describe to me all their acts. Dhritarashtra said,--Thou
hast given me, O Sanjaya, a description of Sakadwipa in brief. O thou of great
prosperity, let this speech of the wise become true. Dhritarashtra said, Tell
me, O Vidura, how with this body of mine I can meet with that ancient and
immortal one?
      I shall go to that Rakshasa today, attended by all my family in order
that that wretch might devour us all at once Kunti said, Grieve not at all, O
Brahmana, on account of this danger. Whether the son of Pritha would enjoy the
Earth, having slain Shalya, or whether Shalya having slain the son of Pandu
would bestow the Earth on Duryodhana, could not be ascertained, O Bharata, by
the warriors present there. O Janamejaya, (about the remedy). Who is there that
would use force for getting over that calamity, O king, which can be overcome by
conciliation and gift? O mighty king, do thou therefore, comfort her.
      Innumerable weapons, again, O Bharata, still retained in the grasp of the
soldiers, seemed in their pendent attitude, to resemble falling meteors in the
sky. Indeed, although that king was earnestly solicited with diverse expressions
such as these, the lord of the Salwas still did not, O bull of the Bharata race,
manifest any inclination for accepting the girl. He is very much attached to me,
O monarch, and to thee also always. What object is that, O king, whose
accomplishment thou desirest from me? And beholding this, O king, that Muni
became ashamed and fell at the feet of the god.
      And having travelled the whole distance (between Hastinapura and Salwas
city), she approached king Salwa and said these words, I come, O thou of mighty
arms, expectant of thee, O high-souled one! O, are the sons of that foremost of
Kurus, Vichitraviryas son alive? And the celestial messenger said unto Ruru,
Resign half of thy own life to thy bride, and then, O Ruru of the race of
Bhrigu, thy Pramadvara shall rise from the ground. The Earth looks beautiful, O
Bharata, with arms smeared with sandal, decked with Angadas of gold and with
Keyuras, and having their ends cased in leathern fences. When the time came, O
Janamejaya, they, plunged into the Sarasvati.
      The king had first staked his brothers, then himself, and then thee, O
princess. Decked with jewels and made of silver, that tall standard bearing the
device of the palmyra, cut off, O Bharata, by the shafts of Subhadras son, fell
down on the earth. No offence, therefore, in any way, attaches unto thee, O
Pandava. This high-souled son that is born of thee, O Kunti, will in beauty be
the rival of Soma, in speed of the god of wind, in patience of Meru, in
forgiveness of Earth, in splendour of Surya, in prosperity of the Lord of
treasures, in courage of Sakra, and in might of Vishnu. I say this to thee, O
Duryodhana.
      What I advised was, O Pandavas, highly beneficial, but the son of Amvika
heeded me not. Go, O king, and gratify that Rishi by the side of a receptacle of
water on the bank of the Sarasvati! Diverse portents, O hero, are visible, all
indicating the slaughters of the Kshatriyas. Waiting upon superiors, Truth,
Freedom from anger, and Gift, these four, O Brahmana, are inseparably connected
with behaviour that is virtuous. At the same time, O Danava, I do not wish to
frustrate thy intentions.
      And because, O king, all men have a right to enjoy a portion of the
merits earned by their offspring, it is for this that they desire to have
daughters sons. Entering his mansion, O king, he went through the morning rites
and after gratifying many foremost of Brahmanas he took some food. And Dussasana
repeatedly said, Relent, O king! Filled with rage, O monarch, Satyaki of
unbaffled prowess then hurled at Shalya a lance equipped with a golden staff and
decked with many jewels and gems. O thou of mighty arms and wealth of
asceticism, there I will approach thee for battle,--thee that art so fond of
battle!
      And the daughter of the king of Kasi, wandering hither and thither for
her passionate desire of tirthas, once more came back, O Kauravya, to
Vatsabhumi. Vasudeva said, O scion of Bharatas race, salvation is not attained
by foregoing the external things (like kingdom, etc), it is only attained by
giving up things which pander to the flesh (body). For investment of wealth are
like Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed by Bhimasena, the high-souled king
Ajatasatru firmly devoted to truth, mustering his patience, after a few moments
said these words, No doubt, O Bharata, all this is true. O hero, take before him
this thy car that is capable of grinding hostile cars. When his army was thus
broken, the Kuru king, O monarch, rushed against both friends and foes.
      Agni said, I accept thy offerings of water, seat, and water for washing
the feet, O sinless one, do thou know me as the messenger of Indra, come to
thee, in accordance with his directions. And I too, O king, shooting sharp
shafts by hundreds and thousands, repeatedly cut: off Ramas arrows in mid-air
before they could come at me. And, O king, the jackal, seeing him come, said, By
the might of my arm have I defeated the others who have already fled. Indeed,
the firmament, O king, having been covered with that bright shower of arrows, a
shadow, as that of the clouds, appeared there on the occasion. Do thou, O son
they have not come yet, O Bharata!
      Then thy army, O monarch, which had lost a very large number of men, and
which then consisted of a very few soldiers, became exceedingly cheerless, O
king! The encounter then, O king, that took place between Arjuna and the son of
Adhiratha, became a very dreadful one. See, O chief of the celestials, yonder
cruel husbandman is belabouring my weak son with the wooden stick, and
oppressing him with the (weight of the) plough, in consequence of which my child
agitated with agony is falling upon the ground and is at the point of death.
Then, O monarch, Shikhandi sped at his foe ninety shafts of great impetuosity,
all equipped with golden wings. Asked by me, O answer it in full.
      I desire, O Keshava to see king Ajatasatru! Then king Duryodhana, in that
encounter, O sire, with a broad-headed arrow whetted on stone, cut in twain the
bow of the virtuous monarch. But, O chief of the Satwatas, now that thou hast
regained thy senses without much ado, do thou, O son of Kesava, witness my skill
in guiding the horses! It is in consequence of that fault, O sinful wretch, that
thou art slain! Do thou hear me, with concentrated attention, O regenerate one,
as I speak to thee!
      Vaisampayana said, O Janamejaya, having heard this story, all the
Pandavas without delay and with alacrity, began to proceed by the way pointed
out by Lomasa. Seeing that he was comfortably seated, and recovered from
fatigue, one of the Rishis beginning the conversation, asked him, Whence comest
thou, O lotus-eyed Sauti, and where hast thou spent the time? And the syllable
Om, O king, standing in the van of that car, made it exceedingly beautiful.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed, the Kuru king Yudhisthira of righteous
soul then set his heart, O monarch, on making the necessary preparations for the
horse-sacrifice. Thus benefited of old by Pandu, shall not, O child, the
citizens slay us with all our friends and relatives now on account of
Yudhishthira?
      Hearing of this meeting, O king, of thine with all these princes and
princesses of thy house, I have come here, O delighter of the Kauravas, for
dispelling thy doubts. Then Yudhishthira and Sahadeva, O sire, each pierced the
ruler of the Madras with ten arrows in the chest. And, O son of Kunti, the
heroic Samva, of prowess incapable of being baffled, whirling a quickly-going
mace, hurled it speedily at Vegavat! 3 Vaishampayana said, King Yudhishthira the
just, the son of Pritha, had not stayed there for more than a moment when, O
thou of Kuru’s race, all the gods with Indra at their head came to that spot. I
have thus, O chief of men, told everything in thy presence.
      Sakuntala, having listened to all this, answered, If this be the course
sanctioned by religion, if, indeed, I am my own disposer, hear, O thou foremost
one of Purus race, what my terms are. It was then, O king, that mighty car-
warrior, king Salya of immeasurable prowess, from behind summoned Bhishma, the
son of Santanu, to an encounter. But I am aggrieved on account of my son, and it
is therefore, O Kausika, that I weep! King Drupadas city was, O Bharata,
naturally well-protected. O repressor of foes, salute the king respectfully as
before.
      Markandeya continued, At these words, O best of men, of the fowler, that
Brahmana endued with great wisdom, then asked the fowler, saying, How shall I
know what is virtuous conduct? Do not, O Bhima, touch a king and a kinsman with
thy foot. O king, with this my mate I was engaged in the gratification of my
sexual desire. Then king Yudhishthira, accompanied by his troops, rushed against
Shalya alone, from desire of slaughtering him, O bull of Bharatas race.
Disregarding his poignant and unbearable pains, Duryodhana began to afflict
Vasudeva with keen and bitter words, O son of Kansas slave, thou hast, it seems,
no shame, for hast thou forgotten that I have been struck down most unfairly,
judged by the rules that prevail in encounters with the mace?
      At that time many brave warriors deprived of elephants and steeds and
cars, and 25,000 foot-soldiers, O sire, proceeded slowly (for battle).
Therefore, O king, adore thou duly these Brahmanas (that are with thee).
Duryodhana said, Tell me, O grandsire, how Sikhandin, O Gangas son, having
before been born a daughter, afterwards became a man, O foremost of warriors.
Thou wilt then, O excellent one, have done a meritorious art for both thyself
and us. And awfully difficult task again was that sojourn of thine,--the period
of concealment,--which task also thou hast performed, O descendant of Bharata;
for one pulled down from a throne it is nothing but hardship that awaits him.
      Beholding the ruler of the Pandavas impetuously rushing against him,
Salwa, that lion among kings, quickly urged his elephants, O king, for the
destruction of Drupadas son. Thus honoured by them and looked upon with
auspicious glances, the old king, O chief of Bharatas race, joined his hands and
honoured them all in return. This is Heaven, O lord of men. And winning the
affections of those kings and uniting himself with them, he next marched, O
king, against Vrihanta, the king of Uluka, making this earth tremble with the
sound of his drums, the clatter of his chariot-wheels, and the roar of the
elephants in his train. After the defeat of the heroic son of Drupada, O lord,
the Pandava army, slaughtered on all sides, fled away from the field.
      Indeed, O father, thinking of all this, I have no peace of mind.
Vaisampayana said, O son of Kuru, they, Yudhishthira and others, ones, waited a
moment, looking at that great saint, (bright) as the mid-day sun. Which amongst
those diverse kinds of flight is this, O crow, that thou art now practising?
And, O Bharata, there I heard of this achievement of Bhima from those Brahmanas
who have assembled round the Pandavas. Yudhishthira said, Come, Come, O Partha,
O Vibhatsu, and embrace me, O son of Pandu.
      Sanjaya said, Having addressed Arjuna in these words, the son of
Parasara, O chief of the Bharatas, went away to the place he had come from, O
chastiser of foes. Thousands of trumpets then were blown in that great
engagement, and a confused din of myriad voices arose there, O king.
Yudhishthira said, My first prayer, O lord of earth, is that I may not be
involved in any dispute (on account of dice) with low people. Through thy
truthfulness, O monarch, Takshaka has with difficulty escaped a painful fate.
And dethroning him, they, O foremost of monarchs, invested his son Suvarcha with
the rights of sovereignty and (having effected this) experienced joy (in their
hearts).
      Some have attained to the status of Guhyakas, O king. O Sukra, water is
thy parent as thou art the parent of water! Hearing these words, Santanus son, O
elder brother of Pandu, said unto the son of Pandu, As long as I am alive, O son
of Kunti, victory cannot be yours in battle, O thou of great wisdom. The field
of battle is covered with shafts and darts and swords and axes and scimitars and
spiked maces and lances and iron Kuntas and battle-axes, and the bodies of men
and steeds and elephants, hacked with many wounds and covered with streams of
blood and deprived of life, O slayer of foes. And if vanquished in this
struggle, thou shalt find thyself in the most wretched plight, and O son of
Kunti, knowing this, and acting accordingly, shalt thou attain success.
      At that sacrifice, O king, Yama, the son of Vivaswat, became the slayer
of the devoted animals. Tell me, O first of speakers, whence was his attachment
to life and whence his happiness? Therefore, O thou foremost of kings, worship
thou these Brahmanas duly. Where, O slayer of Madhu, words, good or bad, are of
the same effect, no wise The holy one said, That, indeed, which should be said
by a person of great wisdom: that, indeed, which should be said by one possessed
of great foresight; that indeed, which should be said by one like thee to a
friend like me; that indeed, which is deserving of thee, being consistent with
virtue and profit, and truth; that, O Vidura, hath been said by thee, father and
mother-like, unto me. Vaisampayana continued, Bhimasena, thus exhorted by Arjuna
of great wisdom, turning to Yudhishthira, replied, saying, As a great many of
the enemys warriors have been slain and as they are flying in all directions, do
thou, O king, now return home, taking with thee Draupadi and the twin brothers
and high-souled Dhaumya, and console the princess after getting back to our
asylum!
      Exceedingly wonderful and terrible, O monarch, was the manner in which
those heroes, unitedly and as separate bodies, then fought with Shalya. Thou
art, O child, versed in both religion and profit. O thou of mighty arms, I am
not truly one of the neuter sex, but I have adopted this vow of eunuchism from
subservience to anothers will and from desire of religious merit. Our prosperity
is thy care and we are thy servants, O slayer of Madhu! Slaying Duryodhana then,
O son of Kunti, bestow the earth with her oceans upon Yudhishthira the just,
like Vishnu (conferring the sovereignty of three worlds) upon the Lord of Sachi!
      The jackal said, Hear, O mighty-armed one, what the mouse hath said. And
Damayanti although herself struck with amazement, smilingly addressed the
warlike Nala who also gently smiled at her, saying, What art thou, O thou of
faultless features, that hast come here awakening my love? This reversal of the
natural order of things, O good Brahmana, is seen everywhere in this world. Hath
my son Duryodhana, O Suta, who is ever desirous of victory, already gone to
Yamas abode, despairing of success? O thou of unfading glory, thou art all this.
      O lord of celestials! Then, O king, Dhrishtadyumna was quickly pierced
with many arrows in his arms and chest by thy son fighting with his bow. Thus
addressed by queen Draupadi, the king, O chief of Bharatas race, summoned all
the leaders of his forces to his presence and told them,--Cause my army, teeming
with cars and elephants, to march out. Then a breeze, delicious and fraught with
pleasant perfumes, perfectly pure and delightfully cool, O Bharata, began to
blow on that spot in consequence of the presence of the gods. Let not that O
Deity, be false which thou hadst at first promised to us.
      Arjuna said,--If devotion, O Janardana, is regarded by thee as superior
to work, why then, O Kesava, dost thou engage me in such dreadful work? With the
arrows, O monarch, that were shot in that battle, all the points of the compass
became completely shrouded, so that the brave combatants could not distinguish
the cardinal from the subsidiary points of the compass. Meanwhile, the Sun went
to his chambers in the western hills, and both the armies, O Bharata, slowly
retired to their respective tents. Hast thou never heard, O Bhishma, that
reproach and glorification, both of self and others, are not practices of those
that are respectable? Speedily shall I cut off that bow of thine with a sharp
shaft!--Saying this I shot at him, O bull of Bharatas race, a sharp broad-headed
arrow, And cutting off one of the horns of his bow with it.
      And honoured by him, O king, thou shall live happily in our home. Both
myself and Arjuna, O king, repeatedly beg thee for pardoning Vrikodara. O
foremost of all that are acquainted with the rules of morality, it is said that
obedience to superior is ever meritorious. The royal sage Dhritarashtra,
however, restraining the grief that arises from folly, enquired of Yudhishthira
the just, saying, ‘If, O son of Pandu, thou knowest it, tell me the number of
those that have fallen in this battle, as also of those that have escaped with
life!’ Yudhishthira answered, ‘One billion 660 million and 20,000 men have
fallen in this battle. O king, thou hast many sons some of whom are dearer to
thee.
      Then, O Janamejaya, that bull in the Bharata race, at the command of
Yudhishthira the just marched against Sisupala of great energy. Nothing can
exceed it in depth, O Sutas son. If, O thou of wicked soul, thou hadst given
this bow to Keshava and become his driver, then Keshava could have (by this
time) slain the fierce Karna like the lord of the Maruts (Sakra) slaying with
his thunder the Asura Vritra. After Karna had gone away, Kuntis son Yudhishthira
retreated, borne, O sire, by the fleet steeds of Sahadeva. Those car-warriors
headed by Kripa, filled with grief, took leave of the king, O monarch, and went
away to a place far removed from that spot.
      Listen to me as I tell thee, O bull of the Bharata race, why Bhima goeth
so. The Pitris, then, learning what the child of their race was about, all came
from their own region unto the Rishi and addressing him said: Aurva, O son,
fierce thou hast been in thy asceticism. The Gandharvas and diverse tribes of
Apsaras are to be seen there, O king, assembled together and passing the time as
happily as they like. Searched have we closely, O king, on mountain tops and in
inaccessible fastnesses, in various kingdoms and provinces teeming with people,
in encampments and cities. O great king, thou also wilt with thy kindred and
relatives, so blaze forth in effulgence soon.
      O Krishna, I accomplish to the best of my power whatever a person living
in domesticity should do, regardless of the fact whether those acts have fruits
or not. And the Apsara, Menaka, O thou of the Bhrigu race, when her time was
come, brought forth an infant near the hermitage of Sthulakesa. This delightful
assembly house of Kuvera that I have seen, attached to the firmament and capable
of moving along it, is such, O king. And Prishatas son (Dhrishtadyumna), that
foremost of warriors, and Pandus son king Yudhishthira, the just, in the very
sight, O Bharata, of both Drona and Gangas son, slew their army with sharp
shafts capable of slaying hostile forces. O thou of great splendour, when,
however, Partha has pierced through thy division in the very sight, I regard my
army to be very weak.
      Therefore, O Dushmanta, cherish, O monarch, thy son born of Sakuntala.
And, O thou of excellent eyes, we also desire to become thy sons. Let thy doubt,
therefore, O Krishna, be dispelled like mist. And many, uttering terrible
sounds, ran hither and thither, and many, O king, uttered cries of pain. The
valiant Sahadeva then, O monarch, filled with rage, fixed on his bow-string a
terrible shaft resembling the Destroyer himself and forcibly drawing the bow, he
sped that shaft at thy son.
      The loss of kingdom, of friends, and of children, O Bharata, and such as
these, overtake him who is still under the influence of desire. Listen, O Ruru,
to the account of the destruction of snakes at the sacrifice of Janamejaya in
days of yore, and the deliverance of the terrified reptiles by that best of
Dwijas, Astika, profound in Vedic lore and might in spiritual energy. Why, O
amiable damsel, dost thou weep? Then that foremost of all speakers, addressing
Yudhishthira, said, O, Yudhishthira, O thou of mighty arms, knowing by spiritual
insight what is passing in thy heart, I have come to thee, O thou bull among
men! O son of Devaki, thy form also, as the Lord of the universe, then became
known to me!
      Vinsas son, O Bharata, was the auspicious Vivinsa. Beholding those
diverse-looking darts approach me from all sides, like long tongues of fire and
blazing forth with fierce energy Bhishma said, Next morning, O king, when the
sun rose brightly, the combat between myself and him of Bhrigus race, again,
commenced. Arise, O king, and fight, for thou art a Kshatriya born of a noble
race! I say this to thee truly.--Hearing, O king, these words of Gautama, and
paying him due honours, the king proceeded thither where the ruler of the Madra
was. The army of Dhritarashtras son, O Madhava, which was vast as the ocean,
hath, O Achyuta, become, after encountering ourselves, even like the indent
caused by a cows hoof!
      His aged parents then addressed him thus, Rise, O man of piety, rise, may
righteousness shield thee; we are much pleased with thee for thy piety; mayst
thou The fowler replied, O good Brahmana, Brahmanas are worthy of all respect
from me. The gods said, Gathering all forms that may be found in the three
worlds and taking portions of each, we will each, O Lord of the gods, construct
a car of great energy for thee. Yudhishthira said, Think, O king, daily of what
is for my great good. Indeed, they lie scattered on the earth like huge peaks of
mountains Vaisampayana said, At the slaughter of Kichaka and brothers, people, O
king, thinking of this terrible feat, were filled with surprise. Having met the
king thus, those brave chastisers of foes, before the sun rose, went away, O
monarch, to the places they chose.
      His life, O Sanjaya, is not vain on whom all creatures depend for their
sustenance, like birds repairing to a tree abounding with ripe fruits. O thou of
wicked soul, be a man! And I went to him, O king, with a cow placed in the van
of my train, and accompanied by many Brahmanas, and (ordinary) priests (of our
family), and by others, resembling the very gods in splendour, employed by us on
special occasions. The strong-armed son of Pandu then, having walked round his
brothers and round Dhaumya also, and taking trident-bearing Siva, the lord of
all creatures, it is then, O child, that I will give thee all the celestial
weapons. They proceeded, O lord, towards the camp of the Pancalas within which
everybody was asleep.
      Having heard these words of his mother, Yudhishthira said, What thou, O
mother, hast deliberately done, moved by compassion for the afflicted Brahmana,
is, indeed, excellent Bhima will certainly come back with life, after having
slain the cannibal, inasmuch as thou art, O mother, always compassionate unto
Brahmanas. Tell me, O sinless one, what more I am now to narrate. Janamejaya
said, After the soldiers had been arrayed thus in order of battle (on the field
of Kurukshetra), what, O bull among Brahmanas, did the Kauravas then do, urged
as they were by destiny itself? Samvarta said, O lion among kings, thy fear of
Sakra will soon be dispelled, and I shall soon remove this terrible pain by
means of my magic lore (incantation); be calm and have no fear of being
overpowered by India. Indeed, the mighty-armed Bhishma, O king, desireth me not!
      And the various couples of battling men and animals, of great prowess and
armed with diverse kinds of weapons and possessed of great skill presented a
beautiful sight, O king, over the field. O son of Bhrigu, this king is renowned
for his knowledge of the precepts of religion. He, O mighty-armed one, is no
other than myself, even Bhishma, that subjugator of hostile cities! Indra said,
O Jataveda (Agni), didst thou go to present Vrihaspati to Marutta according to
my direction? O king, it is not true that he is fallen who speaks not the truth
when asked.
      The wretch who doth not give to others their due, who is of wicked soul,
who is ungrateful, and shameless, should, O king, be avoided. Those brave
combatants, O monarch, loyal to Duryodhana, twanging their bows loudly, fought
with the Pandavas. And from that time, O king, those monarchs who from ignorance
of this, desire to subjugate king Nilas city, are consumed by Hutasana (Agni).
Dhritarashtra said, These words, O Vidura, then thou hast spoken in this
assembly, with reference to the Pandavas and myself, are for their good but not
for ours. Thus, O king, they lived (in that mansion) very guardedly, deceiving
Purochana by a show of trustfulness and contentment while in reality they were
trustless and discontented.
      Dhritarashtra said, The feat, O Sanjaya, that Bhima achieved seems to be
incredible, since my son who was struck down possessed the strength of 10,000
elephants. Then the chief of the Pancalas, and the sons of Draupadi, O sire, and
the twins, and Yuyudhana, uniting together, proceeded against Karna. He is able
to go to the abode of the solar deity, of the lunar deity, and of Siva, O king.
When we are here, O giver of honours, it seems to be highly improper that the
king should himself go to battle to fight, as if he had none to fight for him. O
infamous one of the Kuru race, desiring to praise Kesava, thou describest him
before me as great and superior in knowledge and in age, as if I knew nothing.
      Therefore, O blessed one, go back thither unto Bhishmas presence. 57
Sanjaya said, Then Duryodhana, O chief of Bharatas, repairing to Karna, said
unto him as also unto the ruler of the Madras and the other lords of Earth
present there, these words, Without seeking hath this occasion arrived, when the
gates of heaven have become wide open. Horsemen engaged with car-warriors, and
elephants with horsemen, and foot-soldiers with elephants and horsemen with
horsemen, O bull of Bharatas race. And, O monarch, all of them went together to
Ilwala after this! And then reassuring Kuntis son having truth for prowess, he
also said, Even if, O Bharata, ye range this (entire) earth in your proper forms
none in the three worlds shall recognise you.
      O bull among men, enough of this joke! O handsome one, select thou
another husband now,--one who will not make thee a slave by gambling. Setting
out towards the Sarasvati, he visited all the sacred places along her course,
accompanied by priests, friends, and many foremost of Brahmanas, as also with
cars and elephants and steeds and servants, O bull of Bharatas race, and with
many vehicles drawn by kine and mules and camels. He cometh, O Karna, desirous
of an encounter with thee, slaying, as he cometh, our chief warriors. Tell me
this, O best of regenerate persons.
      O best of victors, how fortunately hast thou spent the term of thy
residence in the wilderness, O king, O lord of monarchs, it was an exceedingly
hard task that thou hast performed by dwelling in the wilderness together with
thy brothers and this noble lady here. And Ilwala repeatedly said, Come out, O
Vatapi! I do not, however, blame thee, O king, for having struck an innocent
person. Do that now, O lord of Earth, by which the mighty and the high-souled
sons of Kunti, of prowess incapable of being baffled, may be prevented from
exterminating the remnant of my host. O lord, bless me, wishing me victory!
      And, O king, the Pandavas soon found out the object of their search
ceaselessly discharging arrows from the bow. Arise, O king, and fight us, O
Suyodhana! Yudhishthira said, By good luck, O Suyodhana, thou knowest the duties
of a Kshatriya! Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, with patience, of the destruction of
human bodies and the loss of elephants and steeds, as I describe (to thee) the
battle. They, however, O Krishna, shall also meet with destruction today!
      If without sacrificing your interests I can obtain peace, O king, an act
of great religious merit will be mine, productive of great fruits. O thou best
of the Rakshasas, falsehood is never respected in this world. Listen to them, O
monarch! Thou wilt not, O monarch, come to any grief from that best of
regenerate persons, owing to any act of mine. Thinking that that was the time
for gratifying his animosity towards, as he thought, the wicked-souled Partha,
he quickly entered into Karnas quiver, O king, in the form of an arrow.
      Their commander, however, the brave and valiant ruler of the Madras, that
chastiser of foes, then protected, O monarch, those troops in that battle. And
thus, O bull of the Bharata race, the earth, to the very coasts of the ocean,
became filled with men that were all long-lived. Then, O king, commenced a
terrible and awful battle. O bull among men, I do not desire to live deprived of
thy company. Why then, O chief of Bharata’s race, this exceedingly dejected
aspect?
      Then Vasudeva, approaching Yudhishthira who was exceedingly melancholy
and filled with anxiety, and who hung down his head and knew not what to do in
consequence of his deep affliction, said unto him these words: Vasudeva said, O
Yudhishthira the just, why dost thou sanction this unrighteous act, since thou
permittest the head of the insensible and fallen Duryodhana whose kinsmen and
friends have all been slain to be thus struck by Bhima with his foot. Do thou, O
mighty bowman, O Karna, see Dhritarashtra, and the illustrious Gandhari, as the
bearer of the thunderbolt did Aditi. If, indeed, O Yudhishthira, Duryodhana
select thee for battle, or Arjuna, or Nakula, or Sahadeva (what will be the
consequence)? 37 Vaishampayana said, Then Valadeva, O king, proceeded to
Vinasana where the Sarasvati hath become invisible in consequence of her
contempt for Sudras and Abhiras. Dhritarashtra said, Whom hast thou, O Sanjaya,
seen to have, from affection, arrived there, and who will, on behalf of the
Pandavas, fight my sons forces?
      O father, are there in the firmament or in heaven any worlds for me to
enjoy? O foremost of all Adhyaryus, tell me in detail what the cause was for
undertaking such a mission! O thou foremost of Bhrigus race, I desire to listen
to all this, waiting respectfully on thee, O thou of excellent vows! And it is
there, O Bharata, that she is known to have become a river, filled only during
the rainy seasons, abounding with crocodiles, crooked in her course, and
destitute of easy access to her water. Vaishampayana said, Formerly, O tiger
among kings, the high-souled Rama (the son of Dasaratha) lived (for some time)
in the forest of Dandaka, from desire of slaying the Rakshasas.
      To control speech, O king, is said to be most difficult. Today I shall
free myself from the debt I owe to the many illustrious Kshatriyas (that have
fallen for me), to Bahlika and Drona and Bhishma and the high-souled Karna, to
the heroic Jayadratha and Bhagadatta, to Shalya the ruler of the Madras and
Bhurishrava, to my sons, O chief of Bharatas race, and Shakuni the son of
Subala, to all my friends and well-wishers and kinsmen! Sanjaya said, They had
not proceeded far, O king, when they stopped, for they beheld a dense forest
abounding with trees and creepers. As regards thee, it is ordained that thou
shalt go thither in this very body of thine.’ Yudhishthira said, ‘This dog, O
lord of the Past and the Present, is exceedingly devoted to me. And this
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, how that great bowman Drona and the
Panchala prince of Prishatas race encounter each other in battle, each striving
his best.
      It has been composed by the ascetic Krishna, O Brahmana, of truthful
speech. Beholding that force (within which Duryodhana was), three mighty car-
warriors prepared themselves for assailing it, for Bhimasena and Arjuna and
Sahadeva, O sire, together proceeded against it with loud leonine roars from
desire of slaying Duryodhana. Thus, O monarch, that slayer of foes, that mighty
bowmen, Karna, having slain foot, horse, car-warriors, and elephants, stood
there on his car. O king, that lord of the earth who hath his dominions on the
west and the south, who is thy maternal uncle and who is called Purujit, that
brave perpetuator of the Kunti race, that slayer of all foes, is the single king
that regardeth thee from affection. Narada said, Repairing at my will to the
mansion of Sakra, I have seen Sakra the lord or Sachi; and there, O royal sage.
      Then the mighty Savyasaci, the son of Pandu, beholding a remnant of thy
army still keeping their ground, became filled with rage, O king. Thou art
indeed, O daughter, in consequence of my prowess, worshipped thrice a day during
the ordained hours of prayer, by Brahmanas, the gods with Indra, the Vasus, the
Aswins, the Asuras, in fact, by the whole universe. And terrible creatures,
gorging on flesh and drinking fat, and blood, O Bharata, began to dance around.
Then the son of Radha and Sakuni, O king, addressing Dhritarashtra, that
foremost of monarchs, said, O Kaurava, our cattle-stations are now in a
delightful place. If thou dost not cast me off, I cannot, O Brahmana, be taken
away by force.
      O fie! Then, O king, great fear entered the heart of Karna at sight of
Bhimas prowess which resembled that of the Destroyer himself unto living
creatures. Vaisampayana continued, When all the Kauravas utterly routed and
vanquished, set out in a dejected mood for Hastinapura, Falguna, on his way
back, addressed Uttara, saying, O prince, O hero of mighty arms, seeing the kine
escorted in advance of us by the cowherds, we shall enter Viratas metropolis in
the afternoon, having tended the steeds with drink and a bath. O thou of
magnanimous heart, tell me what is thou deemest to be beneficial for Ajatasatru
and what is productive of good to the Kurus. Where hath that vast army of thine
now gone, O best of monarchs?
      If, however thou seekest anything else, O Bharata tell us, O tiger among
men, so that we may do thy bidding. Grant us permission, O queen! Do tell me, O
Saivya, if that excellent lady is of the human kind. Then, O king, within a
month, were born a full hundred sons unto Dhritarashtra and a daughter also in
excess of this hundred. Today is the eighteenth day, O Janardana, of this great
battle that is raging between the two sides!
      Therefore, O thou of sweet smiles, steadily keeping virtue before thy
eyes, and duly observing holy vows, summon thou the god of justice and virtue by
the help of thy solicitations and incantations. Casting off his body he soon
followed her, moved by sorrow, O chief of Bharatas race, and forced to it by her
beauty. The high-souled Valadeva, observant of rigid vows, gave away unto the
Brahmanas much wealth and plentiful sacrificial presents, O king, in diverse
sacred spots. Aided by my knowledge, O sire, I know the slayer of Madhu to be
the union of the Gross, the subtle and the Cause; and that He is the Creator of
all, but is Himself increate; and also that, endued with Divinity, it is He from
whom everything springs and it is He unto whom all things return. Even this, O
Janardana, is Vaisampayana said, Reflecting (for a moment), with eyes red in
anger, he, of Dasarhas race, addressing Duryodhana in that assembly of the
Kurus, then said these words, Wishest thou for a bed of heroes?
      Praise thou, O Bhishma, this Karna, the ruler of the territories of Anga
and Vanga, who is equal in strength unto him of a thousand eyes, who draweth a
large bow, who endued with mighty arms owneth celestial ear-rings of heavenly
make with which he was born and this coat of mail possessing the splendour of
the rising sun, who vanquished in a wrestling encounter the invincible
Jarasandha equal unto Vasava himself, and who tore and mangled that monarch.
Vasuki, the king of the snakes, O tiger among men, gave unto the son of Agni two
snakes named Jaya and Mahajaya. Having heard it, thou shouldst act according to
it, O foremost of all regenerate persons. And Yudhishthira said,--How can, O
Sakuni, a king like me, always observant of the uses of his own order, refuse,
when summoned to dice? Firmly resolved that I am on battle, grant me thy
permission, O hero!
      At the close of that conversation Vyasa of great energy, that foremost of
eloquent men, that first of all persons conversant with the Vedas, highly
gratified, addressed the blind monarch and once more said,--Burning as thou art
with grief on account of thy children, I know, O king of kings, what object is
cherished by thee in thy heart. Stop thy tears, I swear to thee, O Krishna, soon
wilt thou see thy husbands, with their enemies slain, and with prosperity
crowning them. And the impetuosity, O king, of that army thus rallied to the
fight resembled that of the surging sea at the moment of the moons rise. After
the wielder of the thunderbolt, O king, had departed, a shower of celestial
flowers of sweet fragrance fell there, O chief of Bharatas race! Then amid all
the warriors the eldest son of Pandu, loudly exclaimed,--He who will choose us,
him we shall choose for our ally!--Casting his eyes then upon them, Yuyutsu said
these words, with a cheerful heart, unto Kuntis son king Yudhishthira the Just,
--I will fight under thee in battle, for the sake of you all, with the sons of
Dhritarashtra, if, O king, thou wilt accept me, sinless one.
      Even such a man should, O chief of the Bharatas, recite the Bharata. The
one that is the stronger of the pair is bearing his burthen of greater weight
(with ease), but, O Vasava, the other is lean, and weak and is a mass of veins
and arteries! Even this, O mighty armed one, is what I also like. Yudhishthira
answered, O thou foremost of the regenerate ones, at thy command I will
certainly act according to all the instructions thou hast given me, and which, O
lord, are all so sweet to the ear. Hearing these agreeable words of Bhimasena, O
monarch, Kuntis son, Ajatasatru, became, with all his brothers, filled with joy.
      If, O Sanjaya, thou art about to be stained with infamy and I do not
(from affection) tell thee anything, then that affection, worthless and
unreasonable, would be like that of the she-asss for her young. One like thee, O
Suyodhana, that has adopted Kshatriya duties, should not act in this way! The
Bharata Vaisampayana, said, Hearing that the Pandavas were near, that crusher of
The Pandavas then, uniting with the Vrishnis according to the usual formalities,
together entered, O king, the city named after the elephant. O foremost of
kings, beholding thee, O first of men, great hath been our happiness. Set right
thy sons, O thou of Kurus race, and I will set the Pandavas right.
      Filled, O Bharata, with pity (at the sight), I stopped of my own accord
and said,--Oh, fie on battle! When many headless forms, O king, had thus risen
up, when the scent of blood had made the combatants nearly senseless, and when
the loud noise had somewhat subsided, Subalas son (once more) approached the
large host of the Pandavas, with the small remnant of his horse. Do thou, O
king, listen to the message of the Lord of the Celestials. The Kuru army, O thou
of the race of Kuru, encountering the proud Pandavas endued with great strength,
skilled in smiting, and possessed of sureness of aim, became weakened and
agitated like a herd of she-deer frightened at a forest conflagration. Do thou
accomplish all, O Partha, that Krishna has said.
      O puissant one. Deeply pierced by Vrishasena in that battle, O king,
Pandus son Nakula, that foremost of men, endued with great activity, became
filled with rage and rushed in that encounter against the son of Karna from
desire of slaying him. Thy daughter, O monarch, hath like a lotus been
transferred only from one lake into another. Even now, O king, art thou attacked
by decrepitude. O Naishadha, I daily recollect thee and am even waiting for
thee, since I derive no pleasure from gambling with those that are not connected
with me by blood.
      O best of men, let the king, O great Rishi, protected by thee, visit the
various places of pilgrimage and give away unto Brahmanas in charity. These fair
ladies, in successive bevies, O king, came out, filled with sorrow, and ran
hither and thither like a herd of fillies on a circus yard. O beautiful lady, do
thou choose one of them for thy lord. For all that, O mighty-armed one, I shall
address the certain words that are for my good! Arjuna said,--Thou applaudest, O
Krishna, the abandonment of actions, and again the application (to them).
      With headless trunks smeared all over with blood with severed limbs and
heads and hips, the Earth looks, O best of the Bharatas, like an altar strewn
with extinguished fires. Similarly, thy warriors, O monarch, covered the great
car-warriors of the Pandavas with dense showers of arrows from every side. But,
O Agni, grieve not for it. Then wounded with shafts sped from bows drawn to
their fullest stretch the two warriors, O king, looked resplendent like
flowering Kinsukas. But I do not seek to renounce thee, wherefore, O timid one,
dost thou dread this?
      Saying these words, O monarch, Sahadeva of great strength, that tiger
among men, filled with rage, rushed impetuously against Shakuni. And he said, In
order that, O Bharata, peace may be established between the Kurus and the
Pandavas without a slaughter of the heroes, I have come hither. 42 43 Sanjaya
said, That chastiser of foes, viz., the son of Radha, thus silencing the ruler
of the Madras, once more addressed him, O monarch, saying these words, In answer
to that which, O Shalya, thou hast said unto me by way of instance, I tell thee
that I am incapable of being frightened by thee in battle with thy words. Seeing
Drona slain in battle, the weapons of many of them, O king, dyed with blood,
dropped from their hands. And, O king, the Pandavas also, accompanied by Drona
and Kripa and Bhishma, returned to their abodes.
      He who, solicited in secret by a woman full of desire and in season,
goeth not in unto her, loseth virtue and is called by the learned a killer of
the embryo, O son of Bhrigu, for these reasons, and anxious to avoid sin, I went
into Sarmishtha. With a broad-headed arrow, he then, O sire, cut off the bow of
Sahadeva. Having proceeded far, they beheld a banyan, O sire, under whose shade
they stopped, greatly tired, and exceedingly anxious about the king and
indulging in such thoughts as these, The mighty son of Dhritarashtra, having
solidified the waters of the lake, lay stretched at the bottom. I desire to hear
this, O Brahmana, for the curiosity I feel is great. I will not, O king of the
Panchalas, discourse on this before you all.
      There, the Pancalas, afraid of Karna, are flying away, O Janardana.
Hearing these words, both Gandhari and Dhritarashtra said unto Keshava that
slayer of Keshi, these words: Go, quickly, O mighty-armed one, protect the
Pandavas! Thou, O Bharata. O child, destroy not the Kshatriyas nor the seven
worlds. All the great bowmen among the Dhartarashtras also, O best of men,
applauded Karna, that foremost of great car-warriors, that first of all bowmen.
      The wrath of Bhishma, O thou of the splendour of Indra, of Drona, and the
king Yudhishthira, will consume the whole world, like a comet of large
proportions falling transversely on the earth. Bhimasena of great strength and
thy son, O monarch, both with uplifted maces (in their arms), worshipped
Valadeva. Surely, O best of Brahmanas, he did not fight again with the Yakshas.
Having said these words unto the king, he addressed Madhava, saying, Without
doubt, O Krishna, I will slay Karna in battle today. Hearing this, Yudhishthira
said, Thou hast no fear., O Uluka!
      Do thou, O auspicious one, know me for Yama. Having said these words
then, why, O Duhsasana, dost thou fly from battle now? The hope became strong, O
king, in the breasts of thy sons that, after Drona and Bhishma and the Sutas son
had been overthrown, Shalya, O sire, would slay all the Parthas in battle. None
are more powerful than Brahmanas and knowing duly, as I do, the power of
Brahmanas, I do not, O Sakra, desire to come in conflict with Samvarta.
Yudhishthira said, Rise, rise, O son of Gandhari, and fight me, Suyodhana!
      Markandeya continued, At these words of Vamadeva, O king, that Thus asked
by them, Markandeya answered, The royal sage Vaka is a great ascetic and endowed
with long life. Vaisampayana continued, Hearing these words uttered by Vasudeva,
all the kings (there present), O Bharata, without saying anything, looked at
Yudhishthiras face. The next day, O king, the remnant of that caravan left the
place bewailing the destruction that had overtaken them and lamenting for their
dead brothers and fathers and sons and friends. Today, even this will be known
to all the Kshatriyas including the very children, O Suta, that Bhimasena hath
succumbed in battle or that, alone, he hath subjugated all the Kurus! These
virtues, however, cannot be attained by one that hath no wealth, even if, O
tiger among men, he may have infinite other accomplishments.
      In days of yore, in the Krita age, O king, all celestials, duly
approaching Varuna, said unto him these words, As Shakra, the Lord of the
celestials, always protects us from every fear, similarly be thou the Lord of
all the rivers! Dhritarashtra replied, The chase of the deer, as also the
examination of cattle is very proper, O child! Behold, O bull among kings, the
Asuras, though elder brothers in possession of power and affluence, were all
vanquished by the gods through stratagem. Whatever be thy command, O king, it
behoveth thy sons with their followers to obey it. It was I however, O lady, who
regulated their number and framed the rules to be observed in respect of them;
and it was I who had to listen to all complaints about them.
      O hero, to-day this wonder of my heart is very great, that thou remaining
by his side, Rama should have encountered Ravana personally. And having beheld
that goddess, youthful and lovely, standing before her, Indras queen, glad at
heart, paid respects to them and said, I desire to know who thou art, O thou of
lovely face. Vaisampayana said, Great was the uproar, at that time, O king, of
both men and women standing on the terraces of mansions or on the Earth. O
child, O thou foremost of all monarchs, this Sisupala possessed of little
intelligence is desirous of taking along with him all these kings, through the
agency of him who is the soul of the universe, to the regions of Yama. Let no
scruple, be thine as regards this, O thou that art fully acquainted with every
duty.
      He who was the cause of these hostilities and who fomented them by means
of his guile, that wretched wight fond of deception, lieth, struck down, on the
bare ground, O lord of earth! Then, O sinless prince! Vaisampayana said, After
the soldiers, O bull of the Bharata race, had been arrayed thus in order of
battle, Dhritarashtra, O, king, said these words to Sanjaya. That place cannot
be reached by vehicles, O Vrikodara. And Bhima dwelt there, O king, for thirty
nights, duly entertained by Sisupala.
      Do thou tell me this, O lord. Then Srutarvan, filled with rage, took up
his bow and struck Bhimasena in that battle, O king, with many arrows on his
arms and chest. Hear, O king, what those two sinful wretches, Ekata and Dwita,
said while conversing with each other! Remembering that it was for thee that the
wicked Vidura was driven (by us) and that we had tried to burn you all in the
house of lac, be a man now; at the time of Krishnas setting out (from Upaplavya)
for the Kuru court, thou deprived of life, on the earth, embracing thy mace, O
Bharata! This, O Brahmana, that thou hast enquired of me is only the result of
self discipline.
      Vaisampayana continued, When the illustrious slayer of Paka refused to
ask for any other boon, Kama with a smile again addressed him, saying, O god of
gods, even before this, I had recognised thee, O Lord! Endued with great energy,
Jalasandha, O king, is one of thy foremost of Rathas. O thou of prowess
incapable of being baffled, he is thy disciple and friend. Vaisampayana said,
Hear, O king, what those descendants of Kuru did while they dwelt thus in
disguise in the city of the Matsyas, worshipping the king thereof. Of austere
vows, he will give us counsel, Sanjaya continued, Hearing these words, O king,
he of Vrishnis race said unto Yudhishthira, O thou of great wisdom, these words
of thine, O king, are to my taste.
      The king and the queen, and Vidura and others, O Bharata, having bathed
in the sacred stream, performed the usual rites of religion. This is generally
the behaviour of Kshatriyas in battle, O king, and this Vrikodara is devoted to
battle and the practices of Kshatriyas. O sinless one, thou art afflicting all
creatures by thy hard penances. And, O bull of the Bharata race, the princes
then, taking Drupada with them after having seized him on the field of battle
along with his friends and counsellors, offered him unto Drona. And, O Bharata,
overwhelmed with grief, and washing her face, she sent her two children with
Kesini.
      He will, in fierce battle, cast away for thy sake his very life with all,
his troops possessed of great prowess and acquainted with all the modes of
warfare, he will, O king, fight fearlessly with thy foes in battle.
Dhritarashtra said, I do not feel great pain, O Sanjaya! Do thou, O lord, grant
them security. O Bharata, we desire to remain always in obedience to thee.
Rallying them then, O monarch, thy son, resolved on battle and desirous of
gladdening them, addressed those warriors, saying, I do not see that spot on
plain or mountain whither, if you fly, the Pandavas will not slay you.
      Proceed, O charioteer, with speed, borne by these steeds. O son of Pandu,
O king Yudhisthira, come and cast the dice. If, O king, we have ever said or
done anything in ignorance to offend thee, it behoveth thee to forgive us. All
this, O thou of ascetic wealth, I desire to hear in detail. And now, O Arjuna,
if it pleases thee, do thou go to that high-minded prince and tell him of my
intention to depart from this place.
      Exercising my reason, O Madhava, and reflected in my own mind, O thou of
Vrishnis race, thinking of Viduras words, and taking into account the acts of
the wicked-souled Duryodhana himself, I have come to this conclusion! It is for
this thou livest yet, O monarch, although thou hast offended me in battle.
Sanjaya continued, The warrior, O king, thus clad in mail on the field of
battle, adored the thousand-rayed Aditya as he rose at morn. O thou foremost of
male Beings, know that we have ever been firm in truth and morality. O foremost
of kings, I should be further instructed by thee.
      That male person, who being solicited by a woman in her season doth not
grant her wishes, is called, O Brahmana, by those conversant with the Vedas, a
slayer of the embryo. Thou regardest, O Prince, as a great blessing what will
bring in its train the terrible consequences of war. Indeed, the recitation of
this history dispelleth all fear of snakes Sauti continued, O Brahmanas, O
foremost one of Bhrigus race, as thy ancestor Pramati had cheerfully narrated
unto his inquiring son Ruru, and as I had heard it, thus have I recited this
blessed history, from the beginning, of the learned Astika. I do not censure the
son of Sini or the son of Hridika, O Arjuna. Beholding that chastiser of foes
made steedless and driverless, Kripa, O king, rushed at that bull of Sinis race,
desirous of despatching him to Yamas abode.
      Having on a single car fought in battle many mighty car-warriors with the
preceptor (Drona) on their head, Satyaki cometh to thee, O Partha! Illustrious
persons like thee never indulge in sorrow, O smiter of foes! Then, O king,
mayest thou hope to live for some time with thy younger brothers. The gods said,
We will not be able, O Maheswara, to bear half of thy energy. And, O lord of
men, as those mighty heroes were entering the mountain Gandhamandana, there
arose a violent wind, attended with a heavy shower.
      O king of kings, it hath been said that a Vaisya may ask one boon; a
Kshatriya lady, two boons; a Kshatriya male, three, and a Brahmana, a hundred.
Struck by one another, the combatants of both armies, O king, began to fall
down, wailing aloud for their (deceased) kinsmen. O lord of the earth, O bull of
the Bharata race, thou knowest what form of rule these Kshatriyas, guided by the
instructions traditionally handed down from generation to generation, have
established amongst their own order, and how far they are competent to perform
the Rajasuya sacrifice. Sanjaya said, When Indras son Arjuna, O sinless one,
began, with his excellent arrows, to break and incessantly slay that force of
ours many heroes were either slain, or becoming dispirited, fled away. O tiger
of Bhrigus race, immediately on seeing the light, that son of Vinata left his
mother.
      O Bhima, what king is there on earth that would dare abuse me thus, as
this wretch of his race, already possessed by Death, hath done to-day? Thus
hundreds of combats, O monarch, that were fierce and beautiful, took place
between thy men and the enemy, on diverse parts of the field. I feel restless in
my heart, O lovely damsels. Those two foremost of men, both accomplished in
weapons, as they incessantly aimed and shot innumerable arrows, O king,
displayed diverse kinds of beautiful manoeuvres. Thou shalt wander over the
Earth, O thou of sinful soul, with the weight of all diseases on thee.
      Amongst elephants, amongst steeds, amongst cars and amongst men, the
Sutas son caused a very great carnage, O tiger among men. Before their
confidence in king Drupada--that bull amongst kings--is established we may
succeed, O monarch, to encounter them. What else can be said, O king, than that
monarchs sovereignty was dependent on destiny? Accepting those words (of
Duryodhana), the foremost of car-warriors stationed on his car, viz., the son of
Radha, addressed Shalya, that warrior accomplished in battle, saying, Urge the
steeds, O mighty-armed one, so that I may slay Dhananjaya and Bhimasena and both
the twins and king Yudhishthira. It seemeth, O Bhishma, that all these teachings
hath been thrown away by thee.
      Beholding him stand there with uplifted mace like the crested mountain of
Kailasa, Bhimasena, O monarch, addressed him, saying, Call to thy mind all those
wrongs that king Dhritarashtra and thyself have done unto us! O amiable one, my
heart also inclineth that very way of which thou tellest me. O wretch of thy
race, today I shall destroy thy desire of battle! O terrible one, thou resistest
even as the fire that destroys everything at the time of the Universal
Dissolution. And after he had approached the king, Dhritarashtra of great
energy, the son of Amvika, addressed him, saying, From my good luck alone, O
Vidura, thou, O sinless one, of conversant with morality, hast come here
remembering me!
      Even this is my grief, O charioteer, that king Yudhishthira the just
should have gone away, leaving me in the midst of the enemy. Without them by me
I do not wish to go to Heaven, O lord of all the deities. O king of Magadha, we
challenge thee. Achieving such a feat, O king, the ruler of the Madras speedily
mounted on the splendid car of Kritavarman. The wielder of Gandiva, having said
these words in wrath, recollected, however, the words, O Bharata, of his eldest
brother.
      Delicate and brave, devoted to the king, and always worshipping his elder
brother, do thou, O Panchali, feed him thyself. O, Bharata of mighty arms,
thyself shalt, in righteousness, beget upon me children endued with great
energy. Sanjaya said, Arjuna then, O king, beholding the prowess of Bhishma in
battle, addressed Sikhandin saying, Proceed towards the grandsire. Markandeya
said, When, O Yudhishthira, all this mystery of salvation was explained to that
Brahmana, he was highly pleased and he said addressing the fowler, All this that
thou hast explained, is rational, and it seems to me that there is nothing in
connection with the mysteries of religion which thou dost not know. And Prahlada
said, Know, O child, these two truths with certainty, viz., that might is not
always meritorious and forgiveness also is not always meritorious!
      What shall I do, O aunt? O slayer of foes, blinded by temptation and the
desire of enjoyment, for the sake of gold, the king destroyed at the same time
both his present and future gains. Once on a time, O scorcher of foes, an
intelligent disciple questioned a certain Brahmana of rigid vows who was his
preceptor, as he was seated (at his ease), saying,--What, indeed, is the highest
good? Having achieved the most difficult feat in the midst of the (Kaurava)
troops, the mighty Satyaki, desirous of obtaining thy sight cometh to thee, O
son of Pandu! How, O son of Radha, when thou art alive will Phalguna succeed in
slaying the ruler of the Sindhus before the sun goes to the Asta hills?
      Covering him first, O bull of Bharatas race, with a hundred arrows,
Arjuna then slew all the steeds of that bowman. O, conform to virtuous practice.
O chastiser of foes, thou protectest the Vrishnis in all their calamities, do
thou now protect the Pandavas also from a great danger, for they deserve thy
protection. Therefore, O uncle, know me now as deeply grieved and filled with
jealousy, and speak of it to Dhritarashtra. Have I not been thus deceived by
her, I fear, O king, that she will soon surpass me in the number of her
children.
      The valiant son of Bharadwaja, that great bowman endued with mighty
strength, that hero born in an excellent Upon the slaughter, O king, of
Vrihatkshatra, that mighty car-warrior among the Kaikeyas, the son of Sisupala,
filled with rage, addressed his charioteer, saying, O charioteer, proceed to the
spot where Drona stayeth, clad in armour and engaged in slaying the Kaikeya and
the Panchala hosts. I had out of love duly shown unto Bhimasena; and I had also
said unto that hero, If thou canst find many of this species, procuring even all
of them, do thou return speedily,--O Pandava, that mighty armed one, with the
view of gratifying my desire, may have gone towards son of the Wind-god may not
be far away; and on Bhima coming up at the next moment, the Rakshasa will not
live. Thus checked in that battle by the ruler of the Madras, O Bharata, those
slayers of foes became unable to stay in front of Shalya. Thereupon, O king,
ashes, white as snow, came out of that wound. Even thus those receptacles of
water, O king, were formed in Naimisha.
      O best of men, tell me that, for thou art possessed of great wisdom and
art skilled in narration! In all those arts that exists in this world, and also
in every thing difficult of accomplishment, I will strive to attain success, O
Rituparna, do thou maintain me. Phalguna, who was careful in observing every
duty, having caused this duty to be performed, proceeded, O chief of Bharata’s
race, next to the place where the Vrishnis were slaughtered. Yudhishthira said,
How is it, O Duryodhana, that thou hadst not this knowledge when many great car-
warriors, uniting together, slew Abhimanyu in battle? Who again, O king, can
defeat in battle the Kurus who are protected by Drona and Bhishma, and
Aswatthaman, and Salya, and Kripa and Karna with a host of Kshatriya kings?
      And, O monarch, king Sisupala endued with great energy, hath placed
himself under his protection and hath become the generalissimo of his forces.
Awful, O monarch, was the noise made by those rushing warriors, resembling that
of the agitated ocean. And it hath been heard by me, O king, that, though hurled
from heaven, Yayati, without reaching the surface of the Earth, stayed in the
firmament. Therefore, O Govinda, O thou of long arms, install thyself at that
sacrifice; for, O thou of the Dasarha race, if thou performed the sacrifice, I
shall be cleansed of sin. O child, let that be acceptable to thee.
      It is the truth, O Nala, that I speak unto thee. As regards myself, I am
willing to fight either Sahadeva, or Bhima, or Nakula, or Phalguna, or thee
today, O bull of Bharatas race! The Kauravas, O monarch, like snakes without
poison, took Karnas shelter, moved by the fear of the wielder of Gandiva. Like a
flower-seller that plucketh (many flowers) in the garden from trees that he
cherisheth with affection from day to day, continue, O Bharata, to pluck flowers
day by day from the Pandavas. In uttering this curse, O thou of excellent vows,
thou hast aided me in the accomplishment of that task.
      With these words, O tiger among kings, Vrikodara of great energy, armed
with mace, stood for fight, like Shakra challenging the asura Vritra. Yayati
then said, I solicit the boon, O Brahmana, that by so doing, the sin of
begetting a half-breed might not touch me. As regards the blind old king, now
become child, thou, O foremost of men, with those heroes, the sons of Pandu,
hast become his refuge! The remaining kings, possessed of great courage, clad in
mail, stood in the array, each in the position assigned to him, according to the
measure of his enthusiasm and resolution, O Bharata. Going from this world, O
monarch, and meeting with those mighty car-warriors (that have preceded thee),
show thy regards to them, at my request, one after another, according to the
order of their rank and years.
      Similarly, Vatapi and Ilwala, and Trisiras, O lord, and the Asuras Sunda
and Upasunda, were all slain by the aid of means! O foremost of kings, I do not
say this falsely. With thee, O Govinda, we have no hostility, no war. Sanjaya
continued, Having said these words, O sinless one, thy son Duryodhana, with his
brothers, made Karna the generalissimo (of the Kuru army). Sauti said, Listen, O
ye Brahmanas, to the sacred descriptions I utter O ye best of men, ye deserve to
hear of the place known as Samanta-panchaka.
      Thou laughedest at Krishna while she stood in the midst of the assembly,
scantily dressed because in her season and obedient to Duhshasanas will,
whither, then, O Karna, had this virtue of thine gone? Therefore, O thou of the
fairest complexion, it behoveth thee to show me mercy, thinking me either as
very silly or thy obedient slave. The Pandavas, O monarch, with Dhrishtadyumna
at their head, filled with rage, rushed against (the small remnant of) thy army.
Thou hast also, O Sanjaya, more than one friend who sympathise with thee in thy
joys and woes, and who, O hero, never retreat from the field of battle. superior
to thy mother; therefore, thou, O Virochana, hath been defeated by Sudhanwan.
      Then wonderful was the prowess that we behold of Bharadwajas son, and his
lightness (of hand) in the use of weapons, as also the strength of his arms, O
Bharata, in as much as, alone, he checked Prishatas son with a shower of arrows.
Arjuna said, My delusion hath been destroyed, and the recollection (of what I
am) hath been gained by me, O Undeteriorating one, through thy favour. O
foremost of the Bharatas, beholding that beloved brother of thine, that bull
among men, employed by Matsya in looking after his kine, I am filled with woe.
The queen replied, That, O great king, can never be untrue! Do thou, O
Janarddana, so order that I may be freed from this heinous sin and that my mind
may be purified.
      The courtesan said, O son of Kasyapa! Dhritarashtra said, After having
wept for the high-souled Bhishma of terrible prowess, what, O son, did the
Kauravas, urged by fate, next do? O most excellent Brahmana, so great is the
number that I am unable to count them all. Thou art the mother of the whole
Universe; and thou again, O Agni, art its termination. If thou hast any love for
me, O perpetuator of Kurus race, do thou then, after having heard these
instructions relating to the Soul, always act duly (according to them), O thou
of excellent vows.
      Tell me also, O foremost of speakers, who they were that invested him and
who performed the actual rites, and how the celestial generalissimo made a great
carnage of the Daityas! Kunti said, Hearing these words of his mother the son
said, O ruthless and wrathful mother, O thou that thinkest highly of martial
heroism, thy heart is surely made of steel beat into that shape. O bull of
Bharatas race, what advantage Vaisampayana said, Hearing, O bull of Bharatas
race, these words of Kesava, Bhishma, the son of Santanu, then said unto
vindictive Duryodhana, Krishna hath spoken to thee, desirous of bringing about
peace between kinsmen. If to accept them as gift be improper for thee, then, O
monarch, buy them for a straw? With the gold-decked shafts that issued from the
bow of the Madra king, the welkin, O monarch, became so filled that there was
not an inch of empty space.
      Thou shouldst not also, O Dhananjaya, slay the warriors of those kings
who may come forth to fight thee, with all their kinsmen and friends. Indeed,
within those waters lay, O lord, that king, armed with his mace, who, O ruler of
men, could not be vanquished by any man! The mighty Bhimasena also, moved hither
and thither by the horn of Karnas bow, was, O king, addressed in very harsh
words such as Fool and Glutton. O Vrikodara, disunions and disputes do take
place amongst those that are connected in blood. Then Duhshasana, O monarch,
having cut off Sahadevas bow in that great battle, pierced Sahadeva himself with
three and seventy arrows in the arms and the chest.
      O Rishi, as a gift, however small, multiplieth in respect of its
religious merits, so a sinful act multiplieth in respect of the woe it bringeth
in its train. Sanjaya continued, Govinda then said, Fie, fie, unto Partha and
once more continued to say, I now know, O Partha, that thou hast not waited upon
the old, since, O tiger among men, thou hast yielded to wrath at a time when
thou shouldst not have done so. 11 Vaishampayana said, Beholding his sons,
grandsons, and friends all slain in battle, the kings soul became overwhelmed
with great grief, O Janamejaya! Be thou truthful in speech, O king. And, O
protector of the earth!
      Why then, O Krishna, hath this one, leaving Yudhishthira followed in my
wake? Dhritarashtra said, After the Kuru warrior Bhurisravas had been slain
under those circumstances, tell me, O Sanjaya, how proceeded the battle. Having
endured a little misery first, from this time, O son of Kuru’s race, do thou
sport with me in happiness, divested of grief and all thy ailments dispelled.
Hear, O son of Pandu, the diverse leonine roars coming from every side. Unto the
Brahmanas also, O chief of Bharata’s race, should, with due devotion and
according to one’s power, be made large gifts and diverse kinds of gems, and
kine, and vessels of white brass for milking kine, and maidens decked with every
ornament, and possessed of every accomplishment suited to enjoyment, as also
diverse kinds of conveyances, beautiful mansions, plots of land, and cloths.
      Repairing unto the reverend son of Santanu, we will, O Bharata, ask him
his advice and according to the advice that he will give us we will fight with
the foe. Desire and anger, O king, break through wisdom, just as a large fish
breaks through a net of thin cords. Sanjaya continued, Then thy son, O king,
cased his body with armour made of gold, and put on a beautiful head-gear
adorned with pure gold. Now the King has repeatedly used those very words to me
in thy presence, O hero, viz., Give thy bow. Seeing those car-warriors of the
Kaurava army, and understanding that the king, unwilling to fight, was staying
within the waters, and hearing that conversation between those heroes and their
master staying within the depths of the lake, indeed, O monarch, the huntsmen,
clearly perceiving that it was Duryodhana who was staying within the lake,
formed a resolution.
      Others, again, O best of men, biting their nether lips, and with faces
rendered terrible in consequence of the contraction of their brows, are
surveying the field all around. Arjuna then said, I will hold in check the whole
army, O Kesava! Dhritarashtra said, I have heard, O Sanjaya, all that thou hast
said. It was properly equipped and properly trained for battle, O king, by
persons well-conversant with elephant-lore. Then, O monarch, there came unto
Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana and the son of Radha, Karna.
      For our sake, O Krishna, thou hadst also to hear many harsh words and
endure the fall, violent as the thunder, of weapons in battle! O chastiser of
foes, on one occasion, a Brahmana came to us from the regions of Heaven. Do not
loathe to do my bidding, O son. Or, let, O king, some clever spies, repairing
thither, secretly compass the death of Bhimasena. Casting off thy body, O
blessed one, thou shalt in heaven live with me!
      Then Ashvatthama, O king, having heard those words from me, cast his eyes
on that extensive lake and began to wail in grief, saying, Alas, alas, the king
knows not that we are still alive! And hearing that pledge of the truth-speaking
Arjuna, the Kauravas then, O king, regained (the lost) tenor of their minds.
And, O king, the Kuru capital at the prospect of battle looked like the ocean on
the appearance of the moon, with the vast crowds of humanity representing its
waters with their eddies; the cars, elephants, and horses representing its
fishes; the tumult of conchs and drums, its roar; the treasure-chests, its
jewels and gems; the diverse kinds of ornaments and armour its waves; the bright
weapons its white foam; the rows of houses the mountains on its beach; and the
roads and shops, like lakes! And, O foremost of conquerors, on all sides of that
mountain, there exist mines of gold, resplendent as the rays of the sun. If, O
sinless one, I with my brothers deserve thy favour, it behoveth thee, O best of
Munis, to dispel the doubt that is in my mind.
      By good luck, thou growest, O son of Pandu! Let the whole of my kingdom
be thine today, O beautiful one! Vasudevas son thereupon said, It beseems thee
well, O Kuntis son, that thou measurest thyself with me. Indeed, if it be not a
secret, it behoveth thee, O chastiser of foes, to say it unto me. Going unto the
Kurus, make thou, O Lord, such a peace that all the sons of Bharata may live
together with cheerful hearts and contentedly.
      The understanding said, These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me
at all. Subalas son, however, of great valour, O king, prevailing over the
Pandavas and longing for victory, began to slay their forces from the rear.
While Vrikodara, O monarch, was uttering these words in a loud voice, thy
fearless son of true prowess answered him, saying, What use of such elaborate
bragging? O foremost of speakers, tell me now, O Suta, who are yet alive in my
army after the death of all the foremost heroes! Whither, O son of Radha, had
this virtue of thine gone?
      O bull among men, tell me truly about thee. Then the Pandavas, O king,
and the Kauravas also, mighty car-warriors all, striking one another, began to
mangle one another with their keen shafts. Behold, O puissant one, that foremost
of men, viz., the son of Surya. Listen now, O monarch, to those hymns as I
recite them. Truly, O Brahmana, it was death to us that we had at all come
hither to tempt thee of rigid vows and ascetic wealth.
      Thus addressed, Shalya, answering, So be it ascended the car, O Bharata.
If, therefore, thou desirest it, O Brahmana, let this fire born of thy wrath
abide in the great ocean, consuming the waters thereof, for it hath been said
that the worlds are made of water. As long as I am alive, O thou of Kurus race,
it behoveth thee not to feel any anxiety. Even thus, O Partha, did Kausika give
them the information. One that hath his soul under control never, O Bharata,
disregardeth anybody in the three worlds,--no, not even the commonest creature,
far less those bulls among men, the sons of Pandu.
      At present, therefore, O blessed one, thou hast no other protector save
thy father. Karna too, otherwise called Vaikartana, O Bharata, in that battle,
resisted Bhimasena, and the Karushas, the Kaikayas, and the Srinjayas. I ask
thee, O king, are there any regions for myself to enjoy in heaven or in the
firmament? This, O child, is not the occupation of a Brahmana devoted to
asceticism. That vast force, as also thyself, O bull of Bharatas race, have
fallen into great danger.
      Joy in the happiness of others, grief at sight of other peoples misery,
desire to alleviate distress, abstention from injury, sincerity, forgiveness,
and truth,--these, O Bharata, prevail amongst the Kurus. O, do in haste what
thou desirest; and stop not to consider its propriety. O beautiful lady, go
withersoever thou wishest! Further, O best of the Bharata race, it is
impossible, to proceed beyond this. Nor do we see the reason, O slayer of Madhu,
in consequence of which, O foremost of men, thou acceptest not the worship
offered by us from love and friendship.
      Vaisampayana said, O king, they are as follows: Duryodhana, and Yuyutsu,
and also Duhsasana; Duhsaha and Duhshala, and then Durmukha; And, O monarch,
learn that king Yudhishthira was a portion of Dharma; that Bhimasena was of the
deity of wind; that Arjuna was of Indra, the chief of the celestials; and that
Nakula and Sahadeva, the handsomest beings among all creatures, and unrivalled
for beauty on earth, were similarly portions of the twin Aswins. O scion of the
Ajamidha race, by performing thy ablutions here in this river, thou wilt be
freed from all thy sins. Then Trita, O king, that best of ascetics, from within
that hole, began to utter wails of woe. Srutakarman, then, O king, thus assailed
by the foe, became filled with rage, and cut in twain the foe-resisting bow of
Citrasena. When I heard that Draupadi, her voice choked with tears and heart
full of agony, in the season of impurity and with but one raiment on, had been
dragged into court and though she had protectors, she had been treated as if she
had none, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
      Then, O ruler of the earth, accompanied by his brothers, the valiant
prince proceeded by the shore of the sea towards the land where the Kalinga
tribes dwell. He that desireth his own good should never quarrel, O sire, with
his relatives. The words that were uttered by Bhishma, O Madhava, were
beneficial and worthy of adoption. Hearing these words of Vasudeva, Gandhari
said, It is even so, O Keshava, as thou sayest! Surely, O thou of well-rounded
hips, O damsel of exquisite charms, beholding thy form of superhuman beauty,
king Virata is sure to forsake me, and will turn to thee with his whole heart.
      Tell me all about it, O Sanjaya! O sinless one, O hero of celestial form,
I am anxious to know who thou art that hast come hither. Go, fight carefully and
summoning all thy patience, O thou of Kurus race! O child, it behoveth thee, O
Abhimanyu, to grant the boon that thy sires, thy maternal uncles, and all these
troops ask of thee. Rahu swallowed the Sun most untimely, O monarch!
      O Dhananjaya, he had heard before that his sire Jayadratha had been slain
by thee, O sinless one. By this act, O Yudhishthira, two objects will be
accomplished; one is a requital of the services rendered by the Brahmana and the
other is the acquisition of high religious merit. O thou of great energy, thy
flames, like the rays of the sun, extend themselves above, below, behind, and on
each side. And Duryodhana said, If this be Partha, O Radheya, then my purpose
hath already been fulfilled, for then, O king, if traced out, the Pandavas shall
have to wander for twelve years again. Sometimes adopting the right mandala,
sometimes the left mandala, and sometimes the motion called Gomutraka, the son
of Pandu began to career, O king, stupefying his foe.
      It is even so, O Hidimva, as thou sayest. Indeed, even as the illustrious
Agni when he blazes forth (at the end of the Yuga) for destroying the mobile and
the immobile universe, even so looked, O king, the mighty car-warrior Partha.
Yudhishthira said, It is not strange that thou shouldst speak thus, O scion of
Madhus race! Therefore, O foremost of truthful men, asked by me, tell me truly
(what that cause is). Tomorrow, however, O lord of Earth, I will frustrate all
his purposes.
      O king, neither the sons of Pandu, nor the chaste Krishna, are in that
city of Yadavas. Acquiring the earth by means of the prowess of thy arms, make
gifts, O best of the Bharatas, unto the Brahmanas and to the means of thy
deceased ancestors as one should. Listen now to me, O Madhava, about those that
are yet alive! I therefore, ask thee, O king, with what feelings thou wilt give
me what I ask and upon which I have set my heart. O Bharata, this act must be
regarded as extremely cruel, deserving of universal execration, infamous, and
sinful, and certainly leading to hell.
      And the roll of thunder, O king, was heard frequently on all sides. O
prince, O thou of great splendour, accept us that accept thee. Bhishma said, O
foremost one of the Kurus, O lord of the earth, thou enquirest about the
strength and weakness of the foe. Then, O Bharata, in consequence of thy sinful
policy, commenced a dreadful battle, making the hair stand on end, between
ourselves and the Pandavas. All of them then enquired after thy son, that ruler
of men, saying, Is our king Duryodhana still alive, O Sanjaya?
      When that foremost of the monarchs, greatly agitated, fell down on the
Earth, loud wails were uttered, O best of the Bharatas, by the ladies (of the
royal household). What else, O Brahmana, shall I do for thee? Do not, O thou of
great wisdom, impute any fault to the Pandavas! O descendant of Kuru, in these
delightful and sacred and heaven-like halls of assembly a long time hath fleeted
away in thy company without my seeing Vasudeva, Valadeva and other leaders of
the Vrishni race. Hearing what Srinjaya has to say, and what thou also, O thou
of sweet smiles, may have to say, let that be settled this very day what should
be done for thee.
      I shall, O monarch, conquer the earth furnished with mountains and woods
and forests. It behoveth thee, O Lord, to grant a boon now to this first of
Brahmanas. What wilt thou, O king, afflicted as thou art with calamity, do?
Casting him off without delay, make peace with the Pandavas, O son! O son of
Pritha, afflicted as I am with all these hundred kinds of misery on account of
Yudhishthira, why dost thou, O chastiser of foes, yet deem me happy?
      A superior, O Bharata, by being addressed as thou, is killed though not
deprived of life. Having said these words unto me, O monarch, the king entered
that lake. None else, O bull among Brahmanas, save the divine Narayana, and the
eternal Nara called also Jishnu, succeeded in passing beyond the point so
guarded. As she sat employed in her task, O bull among men, day was about to
wane, but yet those jujubes showed no signs of having been softened. Thou art as
honest as the wise Vidura, or Bhishma, or ourselves, or Kripa, or Drona, O thou
of great wisdom, dissension with ones own kin are forbidden, sinful and
reprehensible!
      of the earth, O Monarch, who will go to battle, the sons of Pandu have,
by naming them, distributed them in their own respective shares. Thou art not
the foremost amongst us, O Prana. Those foremost of Brahmanas, O tiger among
men, in consequence of their eagerness for enjoying the merits of tirthas, took
up their abodes on the bank of the river up to the site of Samantapanchaka. That
blazing Prosperity, O king, which we not many days ago saw with heavy hearts in
Yudhishthira at Indraprastha, is today seen by us to be owned by thee, she
having, O mighty-armed monarch, been snatched by thee from the royal
Yudhishthira by force of intellect alone. Thus, O Krishna, afflicted with
numerous griefs, and in great distress, am I living, with Dhaumya at our head,
but deprived of the company of the adorable Kunti!
      Repair to thy own city, O protector of men. O heroic scion of Kurus race,
alms also are not now obtainable here as easily as before. If thou art able to
perform it, O Somaka, then I shall explain it to thee. Thyself, O tiger among
the Kurus, and the renowned Gandhari also, should not harbour malice towards the
Pandavas. Whom also, besides thee, O slayer of Madhu, and foremost of men, shall
we consult in this difficult affair?
      I am sure of always having whatever I desire, when, O tiger among men, I
have thyself staying on my side. Yudhishthira said, It is not my wish, O
Krishna, that thou wilt go to the Kurus, for Suyodhana will never act according
to thy words, even if thou advisest him well. They are called Foam-drinkers
because they live, O Matali, on nothing else save that foam. After Bhishma is
slain, O son of Radha, thou mayst then again engage in battle on Duryodhanas
side, if thou hast no preference for any of the parties.-- Karna said, I will
not do anything that is disagreeable to Dhritarashtras son, O Kesava. O tiger
among men, without doubt all the Pandavas and the other kings crowned with
prosperity, come not to a sixteenth part of thee.
      None, O Bharata, (in the Kaurava army), at that time, felt the loss of
Drona, seeing the great bowman Karna clad in mail and stationed at the head of
the array. In the Vedas, in the Ramayana, and in the sacred Bharata, O chief of
Bharata’s race, Hari is sung in the beginning, the middle, and at the end. Thou,
O Kesava, desirest to establish peace and brotherly feelings between the two
parties. And Divination said, I am Divination, O goddess, come near thee. And
wherefore, O child, do we over and over again scatter our speech to the winds?
      Well-spoken speech is productive of many beneficial results; and ill-
spoken speech, O king, is the cause of evils. As regards myself, I desire, O
Bharata, thy good as also theirs. I think, O lord, that the time hath come when
I also should enter the city with them, after taking the permission of
Yudhishthira and Vasudeva! Then, O monarch, at the command of the royal son of
Bhangasura, Vahuka went to the stables and began to examine the horses. With
broken cars, O monarch, the fallen elephants, and steeds lying on the ground,
and men laid low, the Earth, miry with gore and flesh, and covered with streams
of blood, soon became impassable, Karna slaughtered the Pancalas while
Dhananjaya slaughtered the Trigartas.
      Marutta said, Thou, O Purandara, the Viswadevas, the Vasus and the Aswins
ye all know, that in this world there is no escape from the consequences of
playing false to a friend; it is a great sin like unto that of murdering a
Brahman. O son of Surya, let these hostilities end with me! Although his power
waned greatly, yet the foes could not slay the king, for his power, O
Yudhishthira, was established in righteousness. I shall voice it, O hero. O
fool, thou thinkest Janardana will not fight, since he hath been chosen by the
Pandavas to act only as a charioteer, so thou art not alarmed.
      18 Sanjaya said, After the slaughter of Shalya, O king, the followers of
the Madra king, numbering seventeen hundred heroic car-warriors, proceeded for
battle with great energy. Then, O monarch, thou shalt inspire confidence in both
the gods and men. Filled with great grief thinking of his defeat, and beholding
Bhishmas prowess, O king, he addressed that scion of Vrishnis race, saying,
Behold, O Krishna, that mighty bowman Bhishma of terrible prowess. It is for
this, O god of gods, that we inform thee of our present troubles. Let him be
told besides,--O Monarch, this very body of mine is at thy disposal and all the
wealth I have.
      I must tell you, O Bharata, of another wonderful event that occurred
alter the birth of Vrikodara (Bhima). When I heard that Arjuna, by his celestial
arrow preventing the downpour by Indra the king of the gods, had gratified Agni
by making over to him the forest of Khandava, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. While he shot his arrows in that battle and despatched hostile warriors
to Yamas abode, neither the Kauravas nor the Pandavas could notice any lapses in
him, even as the Daityas, O king, could not notice any in Vasava, the wielder of
the thunder, in days of yore, while the latter was employed in crushing their
divisions. With all thy family, thou art now, O fool, reduced to the position of
her slave. Vaisampayana said, O tiger among Kurus, I shall recite to thee that
narration, excellent and extensive and unrivalled, in connection with the
illustrious hero.
      Vaishampayana said, Listen to that history, O ruler of men! O most
praiseworthy of men! And Kesini gave that meat, O son of the Kuru race, unto
Damayanti. each of us, O king, having been desirous of vanquishing the other.
Formerly, when the hour of battle came, this very religion, O thou of mighty
arms, was declared by me (to thee)!
      Duryodhana is a big tree of evil passions; Karna is its trunk; Sakuni is
its branches; Dussasana forms its abundant blossoms Sanjaya said, I did thee
farewell, O divine ruler of men. O foremost of regenerate persons, was theirs an
eternal place in Heaven? And, O thou oppressor of all foes, the illustrious and
exalted Vasishtha by his ascetic power and spiritual insight immediately knew
all. Krishna, that son of the Yadu race, said--Fear not, O respected one. What
end, O regenerate one, has been attained by those men who have been slain, for
the sake of their friend, in battle?
      Surrounded by those Atirathas on every side, the Pancala hero, O king,
careered in that battle, displaying his quickness in the use of weapons. Thou, O
Vasudeva, art acquainted with the views of Duryodhana, Karna, and Sakuni, the
son of Suvala. And, O lady, the forest-paths are hard to pass! 66 67 68 Sanjaya
said, Hearing that Karna of mighty energy was still alive, Prithas son
Yudhishthira of immeasurable energy, exceedingly angry with Phalguna and burning
with the shafts of Karna, said these words unto Dhananjaya, O sire, thy army is
fled and hath been beaten in a way that is scarcely honourable! We are all
dependent on thee, O king of kings.
      (Therefore) O king, seek with thy brothers, for my speedy slaughter.
Beholding these fierce omens that made the hair stand on end, and hearing also
of the fierce vow of the mighty Arjuna, all thy warriors, O bull of Bharatas
race became exceedingly agitated. The mothers replied, We shall protect them, O
Skanda, as thou desirest. But, O Madhava, Dhritarashtras affection for his son
is great. The Kuru king Duryodhana seated in the midst of the Kurus, in a gentle
voice but with deception lurking behind his words, eyeing Karna, and addressing
Kesava, then said, Why, O Janardana, dost thou not accept the diverse kinds of
viands and drinks, robes and beds that have all been prepared and kept ready for
thee?
      Then all the troops, placed in their proper posts, were seen, O Bharata,
to stand, clad in mail and resolved to make death their goal. Had this blood
from my nostrils fallen on the ground, then, without doubt, thou, O monarch,
wouldst have been destroyed with thy kingdom. If thou performest the sacrifice,
O thou of the Dasarha race, I shall be cleansed from every sin. Saudasa said, If
it is proper (for me), O foremost of superior Brahmanas, to say what thou
askest, I should then, O best of regenerate ones, tell thee that thou shouldst
never come back to me. Agreeably to his vow, O thou of Kurus race, the ever-
victorious Bhishma was incessantly engaged in slaughtering the troops of the
Parthas.
      Elephants, O king, struck (with shafts), fled away on all sides. O holy
one, O lord of the past and the future, O lord of the world, O protector of the
universe, let Sakra, afflicted with thy wrath, have thy grace. Vasudeva said,--
Thus instructed in the principles of high religion by the preceptor, the pupil,
O son of Kunti, did everything accordingly, and then attained to Emancipation. O
puissant one, these preparations of thine are destructive of merit. O giver of
honours, it seems that Partha, who without ascertaining what is practicable and
what is impracticable, made this vow in battle, was afflicted by destiny itself,
his judgment having taken a misdirected course!
      When morning came, O monarch, the king set out, with a large train of
women and old men. Yudhishthira enquired, Which, O snake, is the higher of the
two, truth or alms-giving? Supported by the Pandavas, O king, seek thou both
religion and profit. Know, O thou of Kurus race, that as long as those heroes
live, the wielder of the thunder himself cannot deprive them of their ancestral
share in the kingdom. Like a painter producing a picture, it was thou, O king,
who hadst caused me and Dhritarashtra to spring into life.
      All the kings became incapable of even looking at Ashvatthama, O monarch,
who then resembled the scorching Sun himself in the sky. The young ones again
said, We do not, O mother, say that thou art dispelling our fears with a false
story. Behold, O Madhava, those young ladies of beautiful bosoms and abdomen,
well-born, possessed of modesty, having black eye-lashes and tresses of the same
colour on their heads, endued with voice sweet and dear like that of swans, are
falling down, deprived of their senses in great grief and uttering piteous cries
like flights of cranes. Behold, O hero, I am alive today, even I, who could know
peace by losing sight of Nakula for the short space of time taken up by a wink
of the eye. With practice, however, O son of Kunti, and with the abandonment of
desire, it can be controlled.
      His celestial car decked with gold, given unto him by Agni, is
impenetrable in every part, and his steeds also, O hero, are endued with the
speed of the mind. 51 Dhritarashtra said, Exceedingly difficult of
accomplishment was that feat, O Sanjaya, which was achieved by Bhima who caused
the mighty-armed Karna himself to measure his length on the terrace of his car.
O lord of earth, I am also a wrestler. Here, O Yudhishthira, is the sacred
hermitage of that sage embellished with trees bearing blossoms and fruits at all
seasons. Prince Duryodhana said unto Dhritarashtra, Send, O father, by some
clever contrivance, the Pandavas to the town of Varanavata.
      And, O exalted one, Nakula goeth staining himself with Vaisampayana
continued,--Hearing these words of Drona, Dhritarashtra said,--O Kshatta, the
preceptor hath uttered what is true. Vrihaspati said, Prosperity of a rival is
always painful to ones feelings, and for this reason too, thou dost with try
attendant gods persecute the Asuras with their with and kin, and kill the most
prosperous among them; hence, O Lord of the gods, am I changed in appearance at
the thought that my rival is prospering, therefore, O Indra, do thou, by all
means, restrain Samvarta and king Marutta. Listen to those words, O Janarddana,
as I repeat them. When Duryodhana, O princess, is for taking thee before the
assembly, this weak-brained king will no longer be able to protect his
prosperity. O tell me, I am full of doubts respecting the mighty Bhima.
      Beholding the troops of Dhritarashtras son flying away, the Sutas son,
following them, O king, began to forcibly stop them. 39 Shalya said, Do not, O
Sutas son, give away to any man a golden car with six bulls of elephantine
proportions. Gautama said, Through my love and affection for thee, and in
consequence of thy dutiful services to me, a long time has elapsed without my
knowing it, O foremost of Brahmanas. O slayer of hostile heroes, constantly
smiting (as thou dost) cars and steeds and men and elephants, we behold thee on
thy car, O mighty-armed one, to resemble a second Sun. O Bharata, at this place
all creatures bear ill-will to, and the Rakshasas chastise, that man who
committeth aggression, be it ever so little.
      And cured of their fever (of anxiety), they said unto him, As persons
drowning in the wide ocean safely reach the shore by means of a boat, so have
we, by thy aid, O lord Govinda, escaped from this inextricable difficulty.
Sakuni continued,--Thou hast, O son of Kunti, lost much wealth, horses and
elephants and thy brothers as well. Pursuing him for a while, the son of Radha,
O bull of Bharatas race, smilingly addressed Sahadeva and said these cruel
words, Do not, O hero, fight in battle with those that are superior to thee. 40
Sanjaya said, Thus rebuked by Shalya of immeasurable energy, the son of Radha,
feeling the propriety of his rebukers name in consequence of his wordy darts,
and becoming filled with rage, answered him thus: 41 Sanjaya said, Hearing, O
sire, these words of Radhas son who delighted in battle, Shalya once more
addressed Karna, citing an example, I am born in the race of men who performed
great sacrifices, who never retreated from battle, who were kings whose coronal
locks underwent the sacred bath. O bull among Munis, what can be the reason of
this thy present joy?
      decked with gold, cut off by Hridikas son with his shafts, dropped down
from his body, O king, like a cluster of stars dropping down from the firmament.
Seeing then that army thus smitten by thy son, O king, the Panchalas headed by
Bhimasena rushed at them. I promise to win all that wealth of his, and thou, O
Duryodhana, shalt then enjoy the same. Indeed, O blessed one, it was equipt with
many walls made of pure gold and decked with jewels and gems. And the citizens
by thousands, O king, on cars of diverse kinds, and many on foot, also came out,
desirous of beholding Hrishikesa.
      Mounted on their cars, drawn by excellent and well-decked horses, and
with quivers on their backs, they surrounded that horse, O king, and endeavoured
to capture it. When the Kuru army was thus broken, the Kuru king, O monarch,
viz., thy son, rushed against all his foes advancing against him. Yudhishthira
said, Break this array once, O foremost of warriors, and make a passage for us.
O daughter of Jahnu, tell me all. Janamejaya said: Indeed, O holy one, how was
it that the Andhakas along with Vrishnis, and those great car-warriors, the
Bhojas, met with destruction in the very sight of Vasudeva?
      And, O son of Indradyumna, we have come, desirous of seeing the
sacrifice, and to meet king Janaka and speak to him. Arjuna said, Urge the
steeds, O Hrishikesa, to where Durmarshana stayeth. Thus, O thou of great
wisdom, the deities had taken birth as human beings, and after having
accomplished their purposes have gone back to Heaven. Without any trouble,
however, O son of Radha, thou wilt behold Dhananjaya today. Dhritarashtra said,
--The names of rivers and mountains, O Sanjaya, as also of provinces, and all
other things resting on the earth, and their dimensions, O thou that are
acquainted with the measures of things of the earth in its entirety and the
forests, O Sanjaya, recount to me in detail.
      1 2 Vaishampayana said, Upon the fall of Karna, O monarch, the son of
Gavalgana, with a cheerless heart, set out that night for Nagapura, on steeds
that rivalled the wind in speed. And, O king, that first of all warriors in the
three worlds, the son of Indra, with a calm mind, and firmly adhering to his
purpose, then devoted himself, without the loss of any time, to ascetic
austerities. More than all my sons, O Janardana, is the daughter of Drupada dear
to me. Beholding his wrath, Keshava, conversant with the workings of the (human)
heart said, Why, O Partha, dost thou draw thy sword? It is for him, O Brahmanas,
that I have come to this dreary forest full of terrors and haunted by tigers and
other beasts.
      Having heard this delightful news about the discomfiture of our enemies,
we have been exceedingly gratified, O Kauravya. O lord, show thyself. O Bharata,
on the expiration of the thirteenth year, recollecting all their woes, they may
shower death-dealing weapons, even like virulent poison, upon the Kauravas! That
monarch of the forest, O king, is known for this throughout the world! O ruler
of men!
      It would have been better for thee if thou hadst never been born in the
womb of Kunti, or having taken thy birth there, if thou hadst come out on the
fifth month an abortion, than to have, O prince, thus come away from battle, O
thou of wicked soul! Both Vrikodara and myself, and the twins and this maiden
also, all await, O monarch, thy commands. And, O child, take to heart this
command of an old man, this wholesome advice that I give, and which is even a
nutritive regimen. The lord of born beings, himself sprung first of all,
created, for all embodied beings, bodies which were stainless, pure, and
obedient to virtuous impulses, O wisest of the descendants of Kuru! And, O
protector of the earth, hundreds of thousands of creatures were born, and all
were virtuous and began to multiply in virtue, all being free from sorrow and
disease.
      Yayati replied, Thou art sprung from my heart, O son, but thou givest me
not thy youth. And, O represser of foes, see this mountain having minerals,
rivulets, and beautiful woods and beasts, and snakes of diverse shapes and a
hundred heads and Kinnaras, Gandharvas and Apsaras. Aiming then, O Bharata, five
irresistible shafts, Karna, otherwise called Vaikartana or Vrisha, slew five
Pancala warriors. Through the power of the high-souled god who had granted that
boon to Arundhati and through the energy of thyself, O amiable one, I shall duly
grant thee another boon now, that the person who will reside in this tirtha for
only one night and bathe here with soul fixed (on meditation), will, after
casting off his body obtain many regions of blessedness that are difficult of
acquisition (by other means)! It was for your sake that she took birth, as the
daughter of Drupada, among human beings, issuing not from any mother’s womb, O
Yudhishthira, endued with agreeable perfume and capable of delighting the whole
world.
      It was duly sanctified, O chief of men, with many garlands of white
flowers, with many well-filled water pots arranged on every side; with charcoal,
soaked in ghee, of Tinduka wood, and mustard seeds, O thou of mighty arms; with
shining weapons properly arrayed, and several fires on every side. Thou art
without any anxiety, O Bharata, and thou art cruel. O Bharata, unto thy royal
son and with Sikhandin also at their head, desired to rescue (Sweta). And, O
king, while he was living in the forest, he had neither slaves nor cars, neither
brother nor friends with him. And, O bull of the Bharata race, in the same way,
other creatures also, even those born in the race of birds went in unto their
wives during the season alone.
      It behoveth thee not, O king, to grieve for what hath arisen from thy own
fault. O hero, full well do I know the reason why thou hadst entered my chamber
and didst what thou regardest to be an act disagreeable to me. Thereupon,
Suvalas son, taking up mace, jumped down from his excellent car, and with that
mace, O king, he felled Sahadevas driver from the latters car. Do thou, O
Brahmana, relate why the sons of Dasaratha--the brothers Rama and Lakshmana--
went to the forest with famous princess of Mithila. Then the mighty-armed and
white-steeded Arjuna, O king, of sureness of aim and having Krishna for his
charioteer, advanced on his car.
      There, O Bharata, with elephants and steeds slain by Karna, the earth
became impassable and miry with flesh and blood. Vaisampayana said,--It is said,
O Janamejaya, that the god Agni while residing in Mahishmati, earned the
reputation of a lover. Hearing these words, Bhima, O Bharata, smiled in derision
and disregarding the Rakshasa, continued eating with averted face. Therefore,
tell me, O Sanjaya, everything that happened there,--everything that happened in
the battle, born of the folly of my wicked son. In that host of thine, as also
in that of the Pandavas, there were hundreds and thousands of kings, O best of
men.
      Know, O thou of Kurus race, that those wicked sons of thine, headed by
Duryodhana, abandoning both virtue and profit, disregarding morality, and
deprived of their senses by avarice, are now acting most unrighteously towards,
O bull of men, their foremost of kinsmen. But an incorporeal voice, about this
time, said unto the king and his wife with their ministers and priest, all with
hearts paralysed by anxiety, those words,--This thy son, O king, that hath been
born will become both fortunate and superior in strength. And those bulls among
the Bharatas, throwing upon me the burden of looking after all those that were
to be fed by them, would, O thou of handsome face, pay their court to me. It is
evident, O king, that thou knowest that pleasure may be derived from the
possession of various objects of enjoyment. Such a foe, O king, thou hast, by
thy words, placed in a position of ease and comfort!
      O chief of Bharatas race! O thou of mighty arms, bear that burthen to the
best of thy power and might. To thee, O purifier, nothing is unknown in the
three worlds. O perpetuator of Kurus race, O thou that art fully conversant with
every duty, it behoveth thee to show mercy to this child, forgetting the Kuru
prince (Duryodhana) and the wicked Jayadratha. O Purandara, animals have not
been ordained to be slaughtered in sacrifices.
      How shall I, O Govinda, tamely bear it? His bow cut off in that combat,
and deprived also of his armour, that mighty car-warrior, then, O king, took up
another bow capable of piercing every foe. These men, sworn to conquer or die,
are summoning me, O king, to great battle. If, O father, I am really the
daughter of a hired chanter of praises, of one that accepteth gifts, I must
offer my adorations in the hope of obtaining her grace! Thou, O lord of the
gods, art the first-born, the ruler of the universe, and our refuge.
      Those words, however, O Kesava, have flitted away from my memory.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed, Utanka, O chief of Bharatas race, then
left that spot. Therefore, take me before the preceptor and carry me thither, O
Uttara. The Brahmana said, In this connection, O blessed lady, is cited the
ancient story of what kind the institution is of the five sacrificing priests. O
thou of taper thighs, it hath also been heard by us that Madayanti, the wife of
Saudasa, commanded by her husband to raise offspring went unto Rishi Vasishtha.
      11 Dhritarashtra said, After having obtained the command of the army, and
after he had been addressed by the king himself in those sweet and brotherly
words, and after he had ordered the troops to be arrayed at the hour of sunrise,
tell me, O Sanjaya, what did Vikartanas son Karna do? But, O Krishna, in respect
of that matter, thy words shall be my guide. O, kill this wrath of thine that
staineth thy ascetic energy. 54 Vaishampayana said, Having visited Kurukshetra
and given away wealth there, he of the Satwata race then proceeded, O
Janamejaya, to a large and exceedingly beautiful hermitage. Questioned by me, O,
explain it all!
      Thus occurred that great carnage, making the hair stand on end, in
consequence, O king, of thy evil policy! Vaisampayana continued, King Dushmanta,
hearing all this, said, Well-spoken, O princess, this that thou hast said!
Therefore, O king, I desire to be discontented. The illustrious Vrihaspati then
said to her, Very good, thou needst not, O goddess, fear, Nahusha of vicious
soul. Hearing those indistinct sounds of his, Dronas son said, O wretch of thy
race, there is no region for those that slay their preceptors.
      Take her therefore, to thyself, O Bharata, at my command. I am thus known
to Arjuna said, Sikhandin, O Krishna, will certainly be the cause of Bhishmas
death, for Bhishma, as soon as he beholds the prince of the Panchalas, abstains
from striking. And one day, O grinder of foes, the Kuru and the Pandava princes,
with Dronas leave, set out in their cars on a hunting excursion. Shakra, coming
down from heaven, asked him the reason, saying, Why O king, art thou employed
(in this task) with such perseverance? O descendant of the Bhrigu race, attend
then to so much as relateth to the exalted race of Bhrigu, revered by Indra and
all the gods, by the tribes of Rishis and Maruts (Winds).
      Amongst them, however, Trita, by his acts and study (of the Vedas), O
king, became the foremost, even like his sire Gautama. Whether it be peace or
war with the foe that thou wishest, any wish, O Krishna, that thon mayest
entertain, will certainly be honoured by us. Besides all this, O king, that I
have said, listen now to something else that I say. Tell me all, O Sanjaya!
Thick also, O king, was the dust raised by the running steeds, a dust that was
carried from one place to another by the wind.
      If this be the condition, O warder, that the door is open to those only
that are old, then we have a right to enter. O daughter of the snake chief, I do
not grieve for my slain son. Citrasena, the ruler of the sea-coast, with his
son, O Bharata, hath been forcibly despatched by Samudrasena to Yamas abode.
And, O king, struck with that mace, Vegavat fell down on the ground, like a
weather-beaten and faded lord of the forest of decayed roots! And, O monarch,
although herself deserving to be waited upon by others, the daughter of
Yajnasena, O Janamejaya, passed her days in extreme misery, waiting upon
Sudeshna.
      O queen, my heart no longer turns as of old towards kingdom. Vaisampayana
continued, Hearing these pitiable words of the Kuru king, O monarch, the
assembled denizens of Kurujangala all began to weep. And, O scourge of thy
enemies, there is not another person, save thee, that can slay Rama! Swords with
hilts of ivory, and standards, and darts, and steeds, and elephants, and cars of
diverse kind, O king, and banners, and axles, and yokes, and wheels of many
kinds, were cut off in various ways by Karna, observant of a warriors vow. But,
O king, I know the means by which Yudhishthira himself may be vanquished.
      Arjuna said, What are indications, O Lord, of one who hath transcended
these three qualities? And, O wicked-minded one, thou also, being distressed on
account of thy fallen soldiers, shalt be freed from thy sin, on beholding that
mortal. Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, of the splendid prowess in battle of
youthful Abhimanyu while engaged in breaking the car-ranks (of the Kauravas),
protected by the son of Bharadwaja himself. Know, O Bharata, that betting is my
bow, the dice are my arrows, the marks on them my bow-string, and the dice-board
my car. O, do as I bid thee.
      For, O Krishna, the sons of Pandu also, who disregarding the claims of
all Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these words of Vasudeva, all the assembled
monarchs began to reprove the ruler of Chedi. This is my certain conviction, O
king, that an intelligent Kshatriya must not do that which may bring disgrace
upon him. Here the creative and the dispensing deity, and Varuna also rose
upwards, and here too they dwelt, O king! While that success, O king, which is
won by battle, is the worst. Come there, O king, with thy mother and thy
counsellors and officers.
      That head thereupon fell down on the Earth like a piece of meat from the
claws of a hawk, and then his trunk also fell down, O thou of great glory. 56
Vaishampayana said, At the outset, O Janamejaya a fierce wordy encounter took
place between the two heroes. From her are born four other kine, O Matali,
supporting the four quarters and therefore, are they called the supporters of
the quarters (Dikpali). During that year, O king, was begotten upon her by the
illustrious Dhritarashtra a son endued with great intelligence who was
afterwards named Yuvutsu. O Brahmana!
      I will, therefore, O king, with great regularity, wait upon that best of
Brahmanas according to thy instructions in that respect! Send, O Bharata, unto
Drupada without loss of time some messenger of agreeable speech, carrying with
him a large treasure for the Pandavas. Sanjaya said, Thus addressed by Vyasa,
the heroic king Yudhishthira the just refrained, O bull of Bharatas race, from
himself seeking to slay Sanjaya said, At this time Duryodhana, under the
influence of wrath, approached Drona and addressing him said these words, for
inspiring him with joy and provoking his anger. follows: In order, O dear ones,
dissensions may not take place between you and your cousins, we have settled
that Khandavaprastha should be your abode. It is thus, O Ashtaka, that the gross
and visible body developeth from the subtile essence.
      Thou shalt, O Madhava, next say unto the auspicious Krishna of great
fame, that daughter-in-law of the high-souled Pandu, who is conversant with the
details of every virtue, these words, O thou that art highly blessed, O thou of
noble parentage, O thou that art endued with great fame, that becoming behaviour
which thou always showest towards my sons is, indeed, worthy of thee. O lord,
having lived for one night in thy own mansion in happiness, thou mayst then
follow the steed, O foremost of victorious warriors. Deeply pierced, O monarch,
by thy son armed with the bow, Bhima became exceedingly agitated like the ocean
at the full or the new moon. Take them all, O king! Sanjaya said, During the
progress, O monarch, of that battle, making the hair stand on end, and when all
the combatants were filled with anxiety and greatly afflicted, the son of Radha.
      Then, O sire, thousands of men, with eyes full of tears, fled away in all
directions, having heard these lamentations of the king. O best of Brahmanas,
these ear-rings are capable of being taken away, when such opportunities present
themselves, by deities and Rakshasas and Nagas, if worn by a heedless person.
Saudasa said, Say, O learned Brahmana, what is in thy mind. That lofty and
gorgeous standard made of gold, O king, thus cut off (by Uluka), fell down in
front of Yuyutsus car. There, in that tirtha situated on the bank of that river,
all the gods with Vasava at their head, the Viswedevas, the Maruts, the
Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Island-born (Vyasa), Suka, Krishna the slayer of
Madhu, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, and the Pisachas, O king, and diverse others,
numbering by thousands, all crowned with ascetic success, always reside.
      O sinless one, it seemeth to me now that there only it is possible for us
to meet. benedictions of those illustrious members of the regenerate order, as a
return for the homage the latter received,--that they, O Janardana, could sleep
in the deep woods resounding with the shrill and dissonant cries of beasts of
prey can hardly be believed, undeserving as they were of so much woe. Hearing
these words of Krishna, the ape-bannered Arjuna, smiling, replied unto Krishna
who was never fatigued with exertion, saying, Shalya and Karna, united together,
are not a match for myself alone, O Janardana! O thou of unfading glory, do thou
accomplish that which I shall now tell thee, O mighty-armed one. If Dharma be
not a myth, then, O Krishna, thou wilt surely achieve all that the invisible
voice said.
      Speak, O hero, for what hast thou any need? I know Mahadeva truly, O bull
of Bharatas race! Speedily alighting then, O bull among men, from his car,
Shakuni, that mighty car-warrior, quickly ascended the car of Uluka. Thus
dismissed, he repaired to his capital and the Pandavas too, O blessed lord,
wandering from forest to forest passed their days merrily with Draupadi.
Therefore, O thou of the Kuru race, making thy heart what it ought to be,
agreeably to the order to which thou belongest, and casting away this course of
feebleness, summon thy energy and bear thy weight like one that beareth it
manfully.
      Without any reason, O king, thou hatest, from the moment of their birth,
thy dear and gentle brothers,--the Pandavas--endued with every virtue.
Addressing the monarch, they said, We cannot, O king, speak of any transgression
in the presence of Vidura! Dhritarashtra said, If there is anything still left
unsaid by thee, O Vidura, say it then, as I am ready to listen to thee. Scorched
with the powerful shafts of Bhimasena, every limb of mine is suffering from
torturing pain I shall, however, for all that, fight to the best of my
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, what did my warriors do after the heroic
ruler of the Sindhus had been slain, by Arjuna. After some time, O king, it so
happened that certain robbers lifted the cattle of a Brahmana, and while they
were carrying away the booty, the Brahmana, deprived of his senses by anger,
repaired to Khandavaprastha, and began to reprove the Pandavas in accents of
woe.
      This is the boon that we desire, know then, O chief of the gods! But, O
giver of proper respect, the curse that Urvasi hath denounced on thee will be to
thy benefit, O child, and stand thee in good stead. Resolved to return, O
Bharata, he retraced his steps. Vaisampayana said, O king, then those foremost
of bowmen, of immeasurable prowess, holding bows stringed at full stretch and
equipped with quivers and arrows and wearing finger-caps made of the guana-skin,
and with their swords on, proceeded with Panchali towards the Gandhamadana,
taking with them the best of Brahmanas. I look back only on my previous guilt: I
ask thee with anxious heart, O learned one, tell me what is exactly in
Ajatasatrus mind, Vidura said, Even if unasked, one should speak truly, whether
his words be good or bad, hateful or pleasing, unto him whose defeat one doth
not wish.
      Yudhishthira said,--Desirous of the imperial dignity but acting from
selfish motives and relying upon courage alone, how, O Krishna, can I despatch
ye (unto Jarasandha)? Sanjaya said, Listen to me, O king, as I describe, O
Bharata, that wonderful battle fought by thy son, that encounter between one and
the many. Thou hast won them, O chief of the Bharatas, and thine is a celestial
and high goal.’ Vaishampayana continued: Then Dharma, and Shakra, and the
Maruts, and the Ashvinis, and other deities, and the celestial Rishis, causing
Yudhishthira to ascend on a car, proceeded to Heaven. And, O Kauravya, like unto
the lord of birds (Garuda), the ruler of Saubha rushed towards Dwaraka, bringing
with him, O bull among men, his host equipped with all kinds of arms, skilled in
all weapons, consisting of a dense display of cars and elephants and cavalry
abounding in banners, and well-paid and well-fed foot-soldiers possessed of
great strength and bearing every mark of heroism and furnished with wonderful
chariots and bows. Do not grieve, O bull of Bharatas race, for this is not new.
      O mighty-armed hero, be inclined to make peace. O giver of great wealth,
all this betrays only deception, falsehood, and insincerity. And she said,
Childless, O great king, as I was, from fear of my co-wives, when Sikhandini, my
daughter, was born, I represented unto you that it was a son! The Supreme Lord
of the universe said unto him, Performing a sacrifice, bathe with due rites, O
chief of the celestials, in Aruna, that tirtha which saveth from the fear of
sin! Full of virtuous resolves, O large-eyed one, of face as handsome, as moon,
the place where thou hadst resided, viz., the body of Kavya, hath also been my
abode.
      It was not for the sake of saving my life, it was not from fear, it was
not from grief, O king, that I entered these waters! And, O worst of kings, thou
canst not now even look at the princess of Vidarbha. O holy one, O thou of
excellent vows, it behoves thee to answer these questions of mine, O learned
Rishi, correctly, truly, and accurately. The sons of Pandu, however, O king, are
incapable of being exterminated by me. How then, O monarch, dost thou make me a
gift of the whole earth?
      And, O king, whatever countries the celebrated and illustrious monarch
conquered, the people everywhere, from Brahmanas to swains, were all more
attached to him than to their own fathers and mothers. O king, she, and her
children, intoxicated with the wine they drank, became incapable. Then, Trita, O
monarch, duly gave unto them their shares with proper mantras. It is for this, O
king, that thou O slayer of foes, art called Shalya. Thou, O sire, knowest the
entire past and future of this universe.
      And after some time had passed thus, those ascetics of rigid vows once
more said unto her, What, O blessed lady, can ascetics with senses under control
do? Exerting themselves according to their might, and achieving the most
difficult feats, thou shouldst not, O chief of the Kurus, find fault with thy
troops. Never before, O Bharata, has a battle been fought like that between
Karna and Arjuna today. And filled with great joy, O king, they worshipped those
heroes. Knowing this fact, he became the driver, O Bharata, of Partha like the
Self-create becoming the driver of Rudra.
      Thou comest from battle, O son of Kunti, for seeing the king. Turn back,
O Duryodhana! After a long while, O best of men, Dhritarashtra, having
repeatedly swooned, addressed Vidura, saying, Let all the ladies retire, as also
Gandhari of great fame, and all these friends. And the master also comforted
Kunti, saying, Live, O daughter! The nose said, These arrows will never cross
through me, O Alarka.
      O sire, I am of the same mind in this matter with the illustrious
Bhishma. Today, O son of Pandu, I shall extract the dart that lies sticking to
thy heart! Addressing her thus, O king, my mother, that highly-blessed lady, in
seeming smiles, dismissed the princess of Kasi. There is no happiness that is
higher than Yoga.--Do thou know this, O Rama. O Bharata, he indicateth that as
the sand-grains are scattered by him with ease, so will he rain arrows with
perfect ease on the foe (in time of battle).
      And that mighty warrior, stretching Dhritarashtra said,--When that great
bowman Sweta proceeded towards Salyas car, what did the Kauravas and the
Pandavas do, O Sanjaya? O thou of fair hips, I act virtuously, not from the
desire of reaping the fruits of virtue, but of not transgressing the ordinances
of the Veda, and beholding also the conduct of the good and wise! Vasudeva said,
Behold, O Dhananjaya, this Suyodhana who hath transgressed us! O best of all the
gods, prescribe the means of setting him free. If I slay him, O Keshava, I will
not be able to live in this world for even a moment.
      I know, O king, that thou wouldst not desert me. O righteous one, in what
capacity wilt thou reside in the city of Virata? The delicate princess
(Draupadi) deserving of every comfort, O Purandara, should go with us. But, O
thou that resemblest a celestial, the office of equerry is not worthy of thee.
Live thou, O son, inclined to peace and eating fruits and roots of the forest.
      Such a man rescues his ancestors to the eleventh degree, as also himself
with his wives and sons, O chief of Bharata’s race. After five and ten years had
passed away, O monarch, king Dhritarashtra afflicted (constantly) by the wordy
darts of Bhima, became penetrated with despair and grief. For then, owing to
thee, O thou of fair hips, I may go the way that is reserved for those that are
blessed with children. Indeed, O king, as a man excited with wrath crushes swarm
of ants, even so, O Bharata did that son of Pandu begin to crush the Kaurava
host. O foremost of men, this sacrificial horse wanders at will.
      Teeming with all kinds of gems, the Earth, with her forests and
mountains, O monarch, once more cometh to thee that hast no foes alive!
Yudhishthira said, Here are met the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and Krishna, and
Yuyudhana and Virata, O son of the Suta Gavalgana, tell us all that
Dhritarashtra hath directed thee to say. Then that foremost one of Bhrigus race,
accompanied by those ascetics, bidding me farewell, departed, O Bharata, for the
mountains whence he had come. Listen to it, O Dhananjaya! If ever, O repressor
of foes, I said this is to be,--that hath always been.
      King Yudhishthira is always kind, O Bharata, to thy children. Why, O son
of Gavalgana, didst thou too forget this great object, possessed as thou art of
great wisdom, or why didst not thou remind Karna of it? I shall use my staying
charms, O king, and the weapons of all the gods will avail them not. And O
foremost prince of Bharatas race, may that virtuous prince administer the entire
kingdom of the earth in righteousness, and with the respect and approbation of
numerous high-souled Siddhas, and having his praises always extolled by the
court heralds. In the midst of that concourse the mighty-armed and handsome
elder brother of Keshava, O monarch, as he sat down, was worshipped by all
around him.
      When that darkness shrouded everything, O king, we beheld those brave
combatants, steeds and men, move away from that spot. Ahalya said, I am highly
gratified with thee, O learned Brahmana, with thy unintermitting devotion, O
sinless one. Indra then made friends with Namuchi and entered into a covenant
with him, saying, O foremost of Asuras, I shall not slay thee, O friend, with
anything that is wet or with anything that is dry! Do thou with fraternal
feeling ask of me a boon, O Bharata. O thou of mighty arms, I will vanquish the
Kauravas in battle.
      In thee, O chief of men, I have my refuge. Thus, O timid one, was the
existing usage established of old by Swetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, in defiance
of antiquity. Listen to me, O Janamejaya, as I describe them! Having caused all
thy troops and thy brothers to be slain, O Suyodhana, thou shouldst not, if thou
art inspired with righteous motives, think now of saving thy life! Therefore,
for the destruction of Partha and for my good, it behoveth thee, O foremost of
car-warriors, to accept, from love, the office of charioteer.
      Those learned persons at last came, O king, to that tirtha where the
Sarasvati ran a bloody current. Thou art skilled in a narration, O Sanjaya!
--Having heard these commands of my brother, I shall not slay thee, O king.
Bound I have been with wealth by the Kauravas, O nephew, it is for this that I
am speaking to thee like a eunuch,--I will accomplish the desire thou mayst
cherish. Therefore, with all thy advisers, make such arrangements in thy city as
are proper, and pay homage, O monarch, as thou pleasest, to the gods.
      Having slain Karna, O lord of the earth, I shall today come back from the
dreadful battle to pay thee my respects by walking behind thee. Though pierced
thus from every side with numerous arrows by these illustrious warriors,
Duryodhana still, O monarch, did not waver, in the presence of all the troops
who stood there as spectators. Then the mighty Bhimasena, O monarch, dragging
away those huge elephants, made a way for the Pandavas to come out. It was after
a long time that Indra (gratified with such devotion) approached Pandu and,
addressing him, said, I shall give thee, O king, a son who will be celebrated
all over the three worlds and who will promote the welfare of Brahmanas, kine
and all honest men. Many, O Arjuna, are breathing their last meanwhile.
      12 Sanjaya said, Seeing his driver fallen, Shalya, O king, quickly took
up his mace made wholly of iron and stood immovable as a bull. Listen, O
unvanquished one, to the loud wails of those elderly ladies and those others of
middle age at sight of this terrible carnage. And there were brave Kshatriyas,
who having injured one another, did not abandon their weapons or set up any
wails, O sire, On the other hand, lying in those places where they lay, roared
with joyful hearts, and biting from wrath with their teeth their own lips,
looked at one another with faces rendered fierce in consequence of the
contraction of their eyebrows. Sanjaya said, While fighting in that battle, O
bull of Bharatas race, neither the bow nor the car of Bhishma had suffered any
injury. O chief of the descendants of Bharata, then when the beast was carried
away by Siva, the gods spake to him saying, Cast not a covetous glance at the
property of others, disregarding all the righteous rules.
      O bull of Bharatas race! O Lord of the universe, I am being reduced both
in splendour and strength. Sanjaya continued.--Understanding, however, what he
intended to say, Gautama (Kripa) replied to him, saying,--I am incapable of
being slain, O king. This is destiny, O tiger among men. Like the great river
Ganges agitated by a hostile wind, the Pandava host, O king, once more became
exceedingly agitated.
      And horsemen rushed against horsemen, car-warriors against car-warriors,
O king, and against elephants also, in that dreadful conflict. Thou hadst,
however, O royal sage, destroyed thy acquisition by thy vanity alone, and
thereby covered the hearts of all the denizens of heaven with darkness in
consequence of which none of them could recognise thee. Thou knowest everything,
O Bharata. Those huntsmen, O lord, used every day, to procure, with great
regard, a basketful of meat for Bhimasena, O king! If, O slayer of foes, the
cause is known to thee, do thou then tell me.
      Behold these celestial Rishis and Siddhas who have attained to the region
of the gods.’ Gifted with great intelligence, Yudhishthira answered the chief of
the deities once more, saying, ‘O conqueror of Daityas, I venture not to dwell
anywhere separated from them. Therefore, O son of Nahusha, accept her as thy
wife. Yudhishthira said--O Krishna, who is this Jarasandha? And now, O chief of
Bharatas race, it is long since that I saw the lord my sire. What has been
ordained for a person, O hero, must have to be endured by him.’ Beholding Nakula
and the others fall down, Pandu’s son Arjuna of white steeds, that slayer of
hostile heroes, fell down in great grief of heart.
      And, O slender-waisted girl, answer me truly whose daughter thou art. The
foremost of women and devoted to my husbands, even I, O Krishna, was seized by
hair, O slayer of Madhu, in the sight of the Pandavas, each of whom is like an
Indra himself! Although young in age, yet being installed duly by me, O monarch,
the virtuous Vichitravirya looked up to me in everything. After this, when the
Nishada prince began once more to shoot with the help of his remaining fingers,
he found, O king, that he had lost his former lightness of hand. Without doubt,
this knowledge that I have is the result of thy grace towards me, O thou of
unfading glory, my heart is possessed of cheerful tranquillity in consequence of
its being devoted to thee.
      Let all the necessaries of the sacrifice, O foremost of men, be got
ready. Always smeared with white sandalpaste, Vala, having the plough for his
weapon, beholding that foremost of rivers change her course, became, O king,
filled with wonder. I do not wish to say anything more unto thee, O foremost of
Bharatas race. There, O best of kings, the adorable Surya of great splendour,
having performed a sacrifice, obtained the sovereignty of all luminous bodies
(in the universe) and acquired also his great energy. Thou art, O blessed one,
known (for thy virtues) over the three worlds.
      This very province also of mine hath equally been blessed by thee, O
sinless Tarkshya. O lord of earth, that blazing Prosperity which had before paid
her court to the sons of Pandu, hath now been acquired by thee along with thy
brothers! (And addressing Dhritarashtra he said),--This Sanjaya, O king, will
describe the battle to thee. Mustering thy great prowess, O mighty-armed one,
proceed against Vrishnis race, who is always gratified by the diadem-decked
(Arjuna). Cars, O monarch, looking like the changeful forms of vapour in the
sky, deprived of riders and steeds, were seen in thousands.
      And many, O king, looked beautiful in their wounds like blossoming
Kinsukas. Oh, listen to it duly, O thou that art skilled in all tasks! But,
thou, O Kunti, shall be able to bring my sons up as if they were thine. Thou
beholdest now, O son of Vichitravirya, the dreadful fruit of that rejection by
thee (of the counsels of thy friends) though warned against it by many
illustrious persons. Vaishampayana continued, Thus addressed by the king, O
Janamejaya, the Suta said unto him, The mighty car-warrior Vaikartana, O
monarch, hath been slain with his sons and brothers, and other Suta warriors,
all of whom were mighty bowmen ready to lay down their lives in battle!
      Hearing these and many other words, O king, of Vrikodara, that were
veritable darts, king Dhritarashtra gave way to cheerlessness and sorrow. The
Gandharva continued, Then, O bull in Bharatas race, Nandini, alarmed at the
sight of Viswamitras troops and terrified by Viswamitra himself, approached the
Rishi still closer, and said, O illustrious one, why art thou so indifferent to
my poor self afflicted with the stripes of the cruel troops of Viswamitra and
crying so piteously as if I were masterless? Takest thou any pleasure, O child,
in this slaughter of even all those innocent Rakshasas that know nothing of thy
fathers death. If, O grinder of foes, thou dost not act according to the words
of thy friends, thou shalt have to repent upon beholding thy army afflicted with
the arrows of Partha. The motive is victory, O Yudhishthira.
      I desire, O Grandsire, to know his origin and glory. Do thou, therefore,
tend her, O son of Bharata. The blood, however, (that I am regarded to have
quaffed) did not, O mother, pass down my lips and teeth. All of us, therefore, O
Bharata, shall install Karna, that foremost of men, endued besides with every
accomplishment, in the command of the army! Dhritarashtra said, O holy one, I
did not like this business of gambling, but, O Muni, I think, I was made to
consent to it drawn by fate!
      Listen, O Karna, to this simile of a crow that I am about to narrate. And
Sahadeva also, O monarch, said these words of grave import, O Suyodhana, it will
all be as thou wishest! That snake, O king, forcibly tore it away from Parthas
head, quickly reducing into fragments that well-made ornament set over with many
a gem and blazing with beauty, like the thunderbolt riving a mountain summit
decked with lofty and beautiful trees graced with flowers. He, O king, had a
hundred sons endowed with pre-eminent piety. O son of Pritha, let that happiness
last longer through thy stay here, for a few moments more.
      I am pleased with thy behaviour!--Bowing unto him, I then speedily came
back, and mounting on my car, I once more blew my conch decked with gold, And
then, O Bharata, the combat commenced between him and me. And, O best of men, I
too with innumerable monkeys set out towards the south in quest of Sita, O
mighty-armed one. Therefore, with your assistance, I shall now perform the
sacrifice, O the best of regenerate beings. The princess Krishna too, O
Yudhishthira, could not be deserving of that place of sinners. The driver said,
The sons of Draupadi, O king, have been slain, with all the children of Drupada
himself, while they were heedless and trustfully asleep in their own camp!
      The goddess said,--Within a short time thou shalt conquer thy foes, O
Pandava. What is the name of this kind of flight, O crow, that thou hast now
adopted? Beholding Bhima, that delighter in battle, advancing quickly, the
puissant king of the Madras addressed the Sutas son in the following words:
Shalya said, Behold, O Karna, the mighty-armed son of Pandu, who is filled with
rage. One day, O Brahmana, Ruru entered an extensive forest. O thou of eyes like
lotus petals, I am restored to my senses through the auspicious touch of thy
hand.
      Then, O blessed lady, I was brought under the control of thy son by the
deity of love who pervadeth the nature of every being, and I then (mentally)
chose that mighty son of thine as my husband. Having learnt all this, O hero, I
have freed thee from the curse of the Vasus even in this way. Then, O mighty-
armed king, Sikhandins mother represented unto her lord the truth about her
daughter, Sikhandin. Unto him Arjuna replied, Through thy grace, O Madhava, this
vow that even the gods could with difficulty accomplish, hath been accomplished
by me. O bull of the Bharata race, he said all this unto my father.
      I will now enumerate the chiefs by their names, listen to me, O Matali. I
do not, O Krishna, see the man, observant of Kshatriya virtues, who can, O
slayer of foes, venture to conquer us in battle. Addressed, O king, by her lord
in private, Kunti replied, Having given her the formula of invocation only once,
she hath, O king, managed to obtain two sons. It resembled the repeated combats,
O lord, between embodied creatures and their senses. It is, therefore, O
Bhimasena, that we have been overwhelmed with this calamity.
      It was thus that those tigers among men, the sons of Pandu, ever taking
delight in battle, stood having disposed their troops in counter-array against
the army of thy son, and sucking as it were, the marrow, O bull of Bharatas
race, of our warriors, and casting their eyes on Bhimasena stationed at their
head, mace in hand. So here is thy son Virochana, O Prahlada, restored by me to
thee. Some, having slaked their thirst or groomed their animals, and some,
wearing (fresh) armour, O chief of the Bharatas, and some, having comforted
their brothers and sons and sires, and placed them in camp, once more came to
battle. O monarch, the Cedis and the Matsyas, rushing against Karna alone,
poured upon him showers of shafts. O king, the Dhartarashtras constitute a
forest of which the Pandavas are, I think, tigers.
      Trembling from agitation he addressed the afflicted maiden sunk in woe,
saying, Do not go back to thy fathers abode, O blessed lady! Listen, O king, as
I tell thee the utmost limit of my power in battle, or of the energy of my
weapons, or of the might of my arms, O thou of mighty arms! I also am alone
capable of slaying them, O best of men. And Brahma, O king, said unto her, Slay
these creatures of mine! Without slaying all the Pancalas, I will not, O lord,
put off my armour!
      Arise, O Bharata, and fight, observing the duties of a Kshatriya! And, O
Yudhishthira, so also one that is skilled in weapons approacheth one that is not
so skilled; the strong approacheth the weak. O Keshava of the Vrishni clan, thou
knowest my vow that whoever among men would tell me, Partha, give thy Gandiva to
some one braver than you, I shall at once put an end to his life. The heroic
ruler of the Madras, struggling carefully in that battle, thus afflicted by
those mighty car-warriors, drew a formidable bow capable of bearing a great
strain and of imparting great force to the shafts sped from it, and pierced
Satyaki, O sire, with five and twenty shafts and Bhima with three and seventy
and Nakula with seven. This is known to me, O thou of excellent vows!
      Sanjaya said,--Deserving as thou art, this question is, indeed, worthy of
thee, O great king. And, O Brahmana, as the day was fading, she, the excellent
sister of Vasuki, became thoughtful, fearing the loss of her husbands virtue.
Knowing all this, O auspicious lady, do not set thy heart on sorrow. O thou best
of the Bharatas, I have told thee all about the curse of king Kalmashapada by
Saktri, the illustrious son of Vasishtha. I should always say what is for thy
good, O Kaurava.
      All these, superior to thee as regards the four cardinal virtues and as
regards also a hundred other merits, all these foremost of men, have died, O
Srinjaya, and they that are like them will also die. Although these are known to
thee, O Brahmana, I will yet speak of them, so please of all things
promiscuously. O Karna, act in such a way that Jayadratha may not be slain by
Arjuna! Yudhishthira said, My salutations to thee, O grandsire. These and many
other large rivers, O king, such as Sadonirmaya and Krishna, and Mandaga, and
Mandavahini; and Mahagouri, and Durga, O Bharata; and Chitropala.
      And those Brahmanas who were all Brahmacharis beholding the Pandavas, O
king, asked them, Where are ye going to? How great is his power, O Vrihaspati!
Vaisampayana said, They then all saw king Dhritarashtra, O Janamejaya, and
having seen him, enquired after his welfare, and were, in return, asked about
their welfare. Vaisampayana continued, Then, O Lord of earth, those warriors,
the Trigartas, accompanied by their infantry of terrible prowess, marched
towards the south-eastern direction, intending to wage hostilities with Virata
from the desire of seizing his kine. O monarch, dwelling in heaven, king Yayati,
resembling a great Rishi, became an object of much regard, and enjoyed the
highest fruits of those regions.
      The two sons also of Karna, O monarch, those two brothers of prowess
incapable of being baffled, filled with rage, slaughtered the Pandava army in
several parts of the field. In the welkin a voice was heard, saying, Excellent,
O Kesava, Excellent! All the creatures also, O monarch, having repaired to
Prabhasa, returned with Soma amongst them to the place where Daksha was. O
Yudhishthira, O child, thou knowest the subtle path of morality. Then Dharmas
son, O Bharata, said these words unto that chastiser of foes, the son of Rohini,
Behold, O Rama, this formidable encounter between the two brothers!
      And, O Anu, thy progeny also as soon as they attain to youth, shall die.
The Brahmana said, In this connection is cited the old narrative, O lady, of the
discourse between a Brahmana and (king) Janaka. They, O thou of great soul,
shall enjoy the blessings of heaven, O monarch! The lord Sthanu, O monarch, gave
unto Skanda a companion possessed of great impetuosity, capable of producing a
hundred illusions, and endued with might and energy that he could enhance at
will. Reflect thus, O son, and thou wilt find that this thy army is for thy own
death.
      Filled with anxiety all of them became hopeless of life!’ 26 The holy one
said, ‘Arise, arise, O Gandhari, do not set thy heart on grief! Why wouldst thou
abandoning from foolishness the high prosperity that I won for thee, cast off
thy life today, O king, yielding to silliness? In consequence of the diverse
things both myself and Partha had to do, O Bharata, an encounter, O king, could
not hitherto take place between myself and Arjuna! Sanjaya continued, After
Vrikodara had said these words, Vasudeva, filled with joy, applauded him highly
and said unto him, Relying on thee, O thou of mighty arms, king Yudhishthira the
just will, without doubt, get back his own blazing prosperity after the
slaughter of all his foes! tiger among men endued with great prowess was slain,
Bhishma, the son of Santanu, performed, O king, all his obsequies.
      Relent, therefore, O hero, it behoveth thee not to send me away. O slayer
of Madhu, tell me what has removed thy gravity today. And there came also, O
king, Duryodhana and the Kurus accompanied by Kama. The driver of the Bhimas car
having fallen into a swoon, the steeds, O king, began to fly away with great
speed, in the very sight of all the bowmen. Duryodhana and other heroes, attired
in robes dyed in yellow, formerly used, O king, to wait reverentially, with
joined hands, on those old counsellors.
      O bull of the Bharata race, how much more, therefore, should they be
protected that are endued with every virtue and are humbly expectant of thy
favours? Even if they be more than men, O Krishna, I shall yet slay all those
warriors today, however, furious in battle, if only they do not fly away from
the field! Put on armour, O hero, and bind thy locks! The welkin then, thus
covered with that dense shower of arrows decked with gold, looked beautiful, O
chief of the Bharatas, as if a canopy embroidered with gold had been spread
there. War not, O Bharata, with the sons of Pandu!
      Hence on serious occasions like this, I need not say anything more, O
uncle, going thither today I shall gratify, with words mixed with blessings, the
monarch Janamejaya installed at the sacrifice, so that, O excellent one, the
sacrifice may stop. For their sake, that foremost of streams came there, having
made many abodes for herself in that spot, through kindness for those Rishis of
sacred penances, O Janamejaya! And, O great king, after the dismissal of Skanda,
prodigies of various kinds occurred to disturb the equanimity of the gods. And
thy wife, O wretch, shall bring forth a son uniting herself with that Rishi
Vasishtha whose children have been devoured by thee. Inflicting terrible
injuries upon the Kaurava warriors, Satyaki, who is dear to thee as life, cometh
towards thee, O Kiritin!
      Then, O monarch hearing these words of Sahadeva, Nakula the handsomest of
men spake these words,--I shall certainly send unto the abode of Yama all those
wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, who desirous of death and impelled by Fate, and
moved also by the wish of doing what is agreeable to Duryodhana, have used harsh
and insulting speeches towards this daughter o Yajnasena at the gambling match.
The river Sarasvati beheld, O monarch, that large body of Rishis penetrated with
despair and plunged into anxiety for want of a broad tirtha wherein to perform
their rites. Thus addressed by him, Drona said smilingly, I am old, O mighty-
armed one! As men, while swimming in sport on the water, sometimes dive and
sometimes emerge, O king, even so creatures sink and emerge in life’s stream.
Indra turning to Agni said, Do thou, O Jataveda, following my direction, go to
king Marutta to present Vrihaspati to him, and say unto him that this Vrihaspati
will officiate at his sacrifice and make him immortal.
      Then, O Bharata, like masses of clouds scattered by the tempest the
Bharata host, thus mangled and burnt in that battle by the high-souled Bhima,
broke and fled in fear in all directions. O son, I always think of the good I
should do to this Brahmana, like what they do that live happily in others
abodes! Vaisampayana said, Then that bull of Bharatas race went to the sacred
waters on the banks of the southern ocean, all adorned with the ascetics
Vaisampayana said, Varga continued, We were then, O foremost one of Bharatas
race, deeply distressed at this curse. And the earth, welkin, heaven, and the
waters, when agitated by a tempest, roar aloud, O Bharata, even such was the
roar that arose in all the worlds at that time. I do not speak an untruth when I
say that thou, O Gangas son, art an enemy of the whole universe, and especially
of all the Kurus!
      Where is that fanning yak-tail also, O king? Those heroes were then
worshipped by others and they blazed forth in beauty, O king. Yudhishthira said,
When Duryodhana desired to tread along the wrong path, what did the aged Kuru
grandsire say, O Hrishikesa, unto that vindictive prince? And, O monarch, the
encounter between Charudeshna and Vivindhya was as fierce as that in days of
yore between Vritra and Vasava! The Holy One said, Without doubt, O thou of
mighty arms the mind is difficult of subjugation and is restless.
      But, O father, being luckless I have got only two sons! Therefore, O
auspicious lady, I wish to sleep, for I have not the power to stand. A loud
noise was heard, O bull of Bharatas race, in the welkin, made by the Yakshas,
and the Rakshasas and the Pisachas. And displaying his extreme lightness of
hands, and dancing (as it were) along the track of his car, he seemed, O king,
to be present everywhere like a circle of fire. Whilst they were being thus
exterminated, many Kaurava leaders of great might, O Bharata, approached Bhima
and began to fight with him.
      Beholding her fallen down, Bhimasena of great strength addressed king
Yudhishthira the just, saying, ‘O scorcher of foes, this princess never did any
sinful act. The Kauravas and all the kings of the Earth, also know, O Madhava,
that I have made every endeavour to bring about peace. Then, O king, that
vanquisher of foes, the commander of the Pandava army, the prince of the
Panchalas, beheld the cars of the father and the son (thus) surrounded (by the
foe). Thou rememberest, O Ajamida, everything, but still I will call thy
attention to this. All the others, O bull of Bharata’s race, have perished.’
Having said these words unto the king, Sharadvata’s son Kripa, addressing the
grief-afflicted Gandhari, said these words unto her, ‘Thy sons have fallen while
engaged in achieving feats worthy of heroes, while fearlessly fighting in battle
and striking down large numbers of foes.
      O bull of Bharatas race, thou seeketh, O sire, by unrighteous means this
extensive empire, flourishing with prosperity and well-known to all the monarchs
of the earth. O, let not the tigers be driven from that forest! Then Satyaki
pierced him in return with many keen arrows, and struck his driver, O monarch,
with three arrows. After much suffering they at last reached, O king, a dense
forest. Therefore, O lord of kings!
      But receive from me, O blessed one, the boon that thou desirest. The like
of what thy warriors then did unto Partha had never before, O king, been either
seen or heard. Vinatas son Garuda, O Bharata, beholding even a large concourse
of birds, asketh not the aid of many followers (to vanquish them). With his
brothers, O king of kings, that hero of true prowess hath come out of this
dreadful battle, so destructive of heroes, with life! Indeed, the combatants,
desirous of victory and filled with joy, speedily blew thousands of trumpets, O
Bharata, of diverse kinds.
      Without doubt, O Karna, the diadem-decked son of Pandu must have made
this vow about the slaughter of Jayadratha for his own destruction! Beholding
Karna defeated by Bhimasena, five of thy sons, those uterine brothers that were
great bowmen, could not, O sire, brook it. Kunti said, According to thy promise,
I will, O king, with concentrated mind, serve that Brahmana. Even as an
embankment is useless after the waters (of the field) have flowed away, even so,
O king, are these lamentations of thine useless! We saw crowds of cars, O king,
deprived of riders, but unto which were yoked fleet steeds, dragged on all sides
with the speed of the wind.
      Janamejaya of the hilly country, endued with great prowess and
accomplished in encounters with the mace, hath, O king, been slain by thy son
Durmukha. O beautiful damsel, I swear by my own self that if I find any evil to
have befallen my father and mother, I will not live. Thou hast, however, O
grinder of foes, granted to four of thy brothers the pledge of safety. With
countless shafts shot from his own bow-siring, the son of Pandu, O king, cut off
those clouds of arrows; upon which they fell down. Approaching the king,
Gandhari, O bull of Bharatas race, and the other ladies of the household, all
fell down on the earth, deprived of their senses.
      Therefore, O child, thou shouldst not consign thy heart to sorrow. Accept
their words, O king, O thou possessed of great wisdom, act according to what
both Krishna and Bhishma have said. The combatants, O king, encountering one
another, careered in battle, filled with wrath and taking one anothers life.
Well-trained car-warriors, O Bharata, with their shafts, despatched large bodies
of cavalry and the footmen that urged and protected the elephants, to the other
world. Beholding me, they all urged their steeds to greater speed and coming up
to me, said, By good luck, O Sanjaya, thou livest yet!
      Thou thinkest, O thou of little understanding, that thou hast committed
no offence against the Pandavas? What thou, however, O Krishna, wishest to do
for thy friends is scarcely strange, although it seems inexplicable how the
object In view is capable of being effected by either mildness or its reverse. O
most righteous of the protectors of men, O (prince) of a powerful arm! And this
wealth, O Damayanti, is thine as much as mine. With a gratified heart, Gautama
then said unto the regenerate Utanka,--Why, O son, is thy mind so afflicted with
grief today?
      But the mighty bowman, Prishatas son, invincible in battle, though very
much pierced with the arrows of the enemy, instantly began, O Bharata, to
afflict the hostile ranks with greater vigour. O son of Kunti, that thou will
obtain all thy wishes. O blessed goddess! He, therefore, desired to jump
upwards, O monarch, for beguiling Vrikodara. O mighty Garuda who movest in the
skies, we seek thy protection.
      It is cruel of thee, O great king, that seeing me in this plight and so
lamenting, thou dost not, O king, approach and comfort me. With these mighty
arrows shot by thee, those creatures which have taken shelter in me are being
killed, O tiger among kings. Duryodhana said, You will have, O Yudhishthira, to
encounter me one at a time! O chastiser of foes, under any circumstances, war is
never applauded. The Saindhavas then, O king, shot hundreds and thousands of
straight arrows at the wielder of Gandiva.
      If, O king, thou thinkest of choosing others, point them out and I shall
yoke them for thee. Yudhishthira said, Thou hast heard, O child, in detail, what
Drona hath resolved to accomplish. They were royal sages, O regenerate one, that
were sinless and truth-speaking. Beholding that lightness of hand (in Satyaki),
Drona, O king, smiling the while, suddenly pierced that bull among the Sinis
with thirty arrows. If, O hero, thou purposest to treat the evil-minded
Duryodhana in any other way, that purpose of thine will be carried out exactly
as thou wishest.
      A son will be born of thee, who, though of the priestly caste, will be of
a character fit for the military order; while a mighty son will Rama said, The
blame is mine, O father, that like a stag in the wood, thou hast been shot dead
with arrows, by those mean and stupid wretches--the sons of Kartavirya. Sanjaya
continued, Thus permitted by Drona, the son, O king, then made him the commander
of his forces according to the rites prescribed in the ordinance. Know, O
monarch, that both are dependent on each other like the ocean and the clouds,
the ocean causing the clouds and the clouds filling the ocean. Drona said, The
foe, O sire, I see not who may slay me while standing in battle I am engaged in
fight, with wrath excited, and scattering (my) arrowy showers continually. Let
all the kings of Earth be to-day freed from danger!-- Karna said I know this, O
thou of mighty arms!
      O, this fair hand-maid of thine seemeth to me to be possessed of the
beauty of a goddess. These, O bull of Bharatas race, encountered each other for
battle. And when she failed to dissuade the dispeller of darkness, at last from
fear of a curse, she reflected, O king, for a long time!--How may my innocent
father, and that Brahmana also, escape the angry Suryas curse for my sake?
Similarly, O mighty king, and lord of the earth, abstention from doing injury to
any creature is seen to be important than good speech and vice-versa. Then, O
Lord, by that power of thine make the Rishis curse come true.
      As this, O king, Damayanti bowing down to her mothers sister with a glad
heart, spake unto her these words, Unrecognised, I have still lived happily with
thee, every want of mine satisfied and myself cared for by thee. O thou endued
with valour! And, O Yajnaseni, thou art now a slave. My going thither, O
Yudhishthira said, Do, O Krishna, as it pleaseth thee. O sire, do not quarrel,
give them half the kingdom.
      A servant, O king, followed the party at leisure, with the usual
implements and a dog. Observant of rigid vows, the great Dalvya Vaka, O monarch,
poured Dhritarashtras kingdom as a libation on the fire, with the aid of those
pieces of meat. Be pacified, O lord of gods! When I heard that Arjuna, after
having pierced the mark in the arena had won Draupadi, and that the brave
Panchalas had joined the Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
Sanjaya said, Listen, O king, with undivided attention, to me as I recite what
thy sons did after Devavrata had been killed in battle.
      Arise, therefore, O Bharata! Vyasa said, Myself, O son of Kunti, and
Paila and Yajnavalkya, shall without doubt, achieve every rite at the proper
time. O son of Pritha, thy brothers, O king, were not such as to deserve Hell.
Chekitana and the (five) sons of Draupadi, O sire, having slain a large number
of thy troops, blew their conchs. O Muni, no Rakshasa was capable of devouring
Saktri; he himself provided for his own death.
      And then, O king, on the eighth day following of the dark fortnight, the
Kauravas also accompanied by all their troops, began to seize the kine by
thousands. When they came, king Dhritarashtra addressing Yudhishthira, said,
Listen, O son of Kunti, with thy brothers, to what I say. Sanjaya continued,
Embracing thy son then, Shalya the ruler of the Madras, joyfully answered that
slayer of foes, viz., Duryodhana, saying, If this is what is thou thinkest, O
royal son of Gandhari, O thou of handsome features, I shall, for that,
accomplish everything that may be agreeable to thee. Conversant with the ways of
morality, why dost thou, O king, witness this act with indifference? Beholding
all those assembled citizens and inhabitants of the provinces, and his well-
wishers also thus gathered together, and the large number of Brahmanas arrived
from diverge realms, king Dhritarashtra of great intelligence, O monarch, said
these words,--Ye all and the Kurus have lived together for many long years,
well-wishers of each other, and each employed in doing good to the other.
      O monarch, by rejecting advisers that are faithful and accepting those
that deserve no confidence, this extensive and prosperous empire, O son of Kuru,
thou art unable to retain owing to thy weakness. O mighty-armed one, do thou now
enjoy, O king, the rewards of all thy deeds of righteousness of those regions
which thou hast acquired thyself by thy penances and of all thy gifts. If the
Earth herself cleaves in twain, or mountain crests split, I can re-unite them, O
king, by my incantations before the eyes of all. O king, be thou, O giver of
honours, righteous in thy conduct towards the sons of Pandu. Unyoking the steeds
to their case, pluck off their arrows, O Madhava!
      O thou of lotus-eyes, thou knowest, O timid girl, how we ourselves, for
the perpetuation of the Kuru race, were begotten by Krishna-Dwaipayana.
Therefore, O son, if thou likest, it is good for us to go there. Dost thou not
behold, O Brahmana, that vegetable juice floweth from the wound in my hand? O
thou that are like unto an immortal, ask thou a fresh boon! I will, O
Duryodhana, gladden thee today with thy friends, by slaying in battle that hero,
viz., Arjuna, that foremost of conquerors.
      O son, they are again protected by many foremost of men endued with great
activity, and of famous achievements, resembling the very Regents of the world
and renowned over the whole earth. I shall today reach the end of that woe, O
son of Prishata. In the game at dice, O slayer of Madhu, that was joyfully
accepted by them, the Pandavas were vanquished and their kingdom was won by
Sakuni. For a moment, therefore, O sire, he seemed to yield to the crow. Grieved
at the prosperity of the high-souled Pandavas, thou conspirest, O Bharata, with
Suvalas son about the gambling match.
      Behold, O Bharata, those scimitars, decked with gold, and having ivory
handles, and those displaced shields embossed with gold. If I do not deserve to
be abandoned by you two in battle, then, Dhritarashtra said, After that dreadful
vow had been made in battle by Bhishma enraged by the words of my son, what, O
Sanjaya, did Bhishma do unto the sons of Pandu or what did the Panchalas do unto
the grandsire? And, O illustrious ascetic and foremost of Brahmanas, how did
those twelve years (of exile) of those warriors who were slayers of foes, pass
away in the forest? Kuru thereupon replied, saying, O thou of a hundred
sacrifices, they that will die upon this plain shall proceed to regions of
blessedness after being cleansed of their sins! Let alone the Pandavas, O slayer
of Madhu, the very gods are not competent to vanquish Bhishma, Kripa, Drona and
Karna, in battle.
      Hear, O monarch, why that disunion occurred between the Kurus and the
Pandavas, and why also that exile into the woods immediately proceeding from the
game at dice prompted by the desire (of the Kurus) for rule. King Dhritarashtra,
in great sorrow, said these words with reference to it: Dhritarashtra said,
Beholding Rama approach that spot when the mace-fight was about to happen, how,
O Sanjaya, did my son fight Bhima? O king, it is the certain duty of those that
reside in the kings realm to do what is agreeable to the king. O thou of the
priestly class! Under these circumstances, O king, battle excepted, what dost
thou desire?
      Sanjaya continued, In this strain, O king, those heroes, the Pandavas,
flushed with victory, repeatedly spoke there (rebuking and mocking Duryodhana).
Dhritarashtra said, Do thou again touch me, O son of Pandu, with thy hand, and
do thou embrace me. After Shalya had been invested with the command, loud
leonine roars arose among thy troops and diverse musical instruments also, O
Bharata, were beat and blown. O child, Sanjaya is one of our trustiest friends.
He that is delicate and youthful in years, he that is brave and handsome in
person,--that son of Pandu who is dear unto his brothers as also unto all, and
who, indeed, is their very life though walking with a separate body,--he that is
conversant with various modes of warfare,--he that is endued with great strength
and is a mighty bowman,--tell me, O Krishna, whether that dear child of mine,
Nakula, who was brought up in luxury, is now well in body and mind?
      But before he could come down from his car, O Bharata, Drona with his
shafts cut off that mace into fragments. O Kaurava, O king, all these that are
headed (even) by Karna, wait not on the field. Having been insulted thus, O
hero, what use have I with life. Then Vrihaspati said to the queen of Indra who
was beside herself through fear, What thou hast been told by me will come to be
true, be sure, O goddess. 46 Vaishampayana said, Listen now to the large bands
of the mothers, those slayers of foes, O hero, that became the companions of
Kumara, as I mention their names.
      From that day, O Bharata, the Rakshasas (of the region) were seen by the
inhabitants of that town to be very peaceful towards mankind. That tiger among
men very cheerfully said unto me these words--Wait for me, O charioteer,
restraining the steeds for a short space of time, that is, till I slay those
that are bent upon my destruction.--Beholding then the mighty Bhima rushing mace
in hand, all our troops (that supported him) became filled with delight. O best
of Sauti said, Then the snake-dame Jaratkaru, calling her own son, told him the
following words according to the directions of Vasuki, the king of the snakes.
As a person, O king, who has to travel a long way is sometimes obliged to halt
when fatigued with toil, even so, O Bharata, they that are of little
intelligence, travelling along the extended way of life, have to make frequent
halts in the shape of repeated births in the womb. O Partha, on these slopes of
the Gandhamadana, yon beautiful blossoming trees, being embraced by creepers
with blossoms at their tops, look lovely.
      A jackal is living in thy house, O king, in the form of Duryodhana. Is
thy mind, O king, pleased with thy residence in the woods? On the other hand, if
thou, O jackal, permittest it, I will even slay the mouse and feast on him.
Having brought it, I shall go hence, O lord, with thy permission. Beholding that
foremost of ascetics, Vasishtha, of the austerest penances, she worshipped him,
O Bharata according to the rites observed by ascetics.
      All thy warriors fled, O monarch, except king Duryodhana. The ministers
said, Hear, O monarch of him who told us before of the meeting between that
foremost Brahmana and that prince of snakes in the woods. The holy one said, It
shall be, O thou of mighty arms, what thou, O Pandavas, sayest, I will strive to
bring about that which would be beneficial to both the Pandavas and the Kurus.
long also, O chastiser of foes, wilt thou stay here? 36 Duryodhana said, This
one, O Karna, will act as thy driver, this ruler of the Madras, who is superior
to Krishna, like Matali the driver of the chief of the celestials.
      Rise then, even now, O Suyodhana, and give us battle! Therefore, O thou
of Purus race, cherish thy high-souled son born of Sakuntala--And because this
child is to be cherished by thee even at our word, therefore shall this thy son
be known by the name of Bharata (the cherished). Then, O bull of Bharatas race,
Samyamanis son, standing on that car whose steeds were slain, looked at the son
of the renowned king of the Panchalas. Awake, O king, and understand the eternal
virtues (of the order). O, do not cut down that forest with its tigers!
      This is true, O king. Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Vrikodara the son of
Pandu, and Satyaki, O king, that foremost of car-warriors among the Vrishnis,
and Dhrishtadyumna, and Shikhandi, and others among the Pandus, the Pancalas,
and the Srinjayas, worshipped the son of Kunti at the slaughter of the Sutas
son. The road, O king, along which the party proceeded, looked resplendent, O
hero, and was highly comfortable for all, and resembled heaven itself. While the
scion of Sini, O sire, was thus being pacified by Sahadeva, the son of the
Panchala king, smiling, said these words, Release Sinis grandson, O Bhima who is
so proud of his prowess in battle. I desire, O monarch, all this to be done by
thee, O scorcher of foes.
      Thou mayest now, O Suyodhana, be willing to make a gift of the earth to
me. With this wealth, O king, I will play with thee. O son of Pritha, without
yielding to scruples of any kind, to what he, O chief of Bharatas race, said, in
answer to our enquiries, agreeably to heavenly forms. O lord of men, assign me
unto (the princess) Uttara. Marutta said, Verily this rain-cloud floating in the
air indicates that Indra must be near at present, therefore, O prince of
Brahmanas, I seek shelter from thee.
      Know this, O Vrikodara. The thought consumeth, O Kesava, that being
dragged into the presence of all the Kurus in their assembly by Dhritarashtras
sons, insults worse than death were heaped on Krishna, O chastiser of foes, the
banishment of my sons from their capital and their wanderings in the wilderness,
--these and various other griefs, O Janardana, have been mine. O foremost of
warriors, pierce this division, and keep these to thy right. Let this, however,
O hero, be my understanding with Vikartanas son that I will in his presence
utter whatever speeches I desire. And when an army is routed, even brave
leaders, O king, at the head of large divisions consisting of the four kinds of
forces, are incapable of rallying them.
      And having beheld him shining with his brightness, just as the fire
shineth with its flames, they, O king! Possessed of great valour, king
Yudhishthira the just, O monarch, arrived at the lake known by the name of
Dvaipayana within which Duryodhana then was. Yet thou hast killed me, O king,
for which I will curse thee certainly. Sanjaya said, Unto the ruler of the
Madras who was speaking in that strain, that chastiser of foes, viz., thy
mighty-armed son of cheerful soul replied, saying, Do not, O mighty-armed one,
think disparagingly of Karna, otherwise called Vaikartana, in battle,--that
warrior who is the foremost of all wielders of arms and who is acquainted with
the meaning of the whole body of our scriptures. Beholding the prowess of Karna,
O king, I thought that a single Pancala even would not, in that battle, escape
from the son of Adhiratha.
      Where is that manliness of thine, O sire, and where, O Suyodhana, is that
pride cherished by thee! Knowing this, O thou of mighty arms, form thou the
array that thou wishest! Thus have I, O Bharata, narrated unto thee all about
the birth of Duhsala. Indeed, all the Nagas placing the old and the young ones
before them, bowed unto him with their heads and joining their hands addressed
him, saying, Be gratified with us, O holy one! Thereupon what happened to Rudra,
learn from me, O Yudhishthira!
      Elephant-warrior rushing against elephant-warrior and car-warrior against
car-warrior in that battle slew each other with darts and lances and cloth-yard
shafts, O Bharata. These arrows, however, O monarch, caused thy sire little
pain, for the son of Ganga received them laughingly. And, O best of male beings,
assuming also the form of half-man and half-lion, thou hadst slain in days of
yore that ancient Daitya of mighty prowess known by the name of Hiranyakasipu.
For, O thou of beautiful face, thou art certainly equal in my estimation unto
the wife of a superior. And, O king, the younger brother of Vrishaparvan who was
known by the name of Ajaka became noted on earth as king Salwa.
      While those, O bull of the Bharata race, that having won enormous riches
nevertheless, behave like Dhritarashtra said, Consider, O Duryodhana, O dear
son, what I tell thee. Listen, O king, to what Duryodhana said when overtaken by
calamity. Large numbers of Kshatriyas, inspired with desire of victory, were
struck down with arrows, O king, and fell prostrate on the Earth. Indeed, O
chief of the Bharatas, thy soldiers fled on all sides. Dhritarashtra said, What,
indeed, O Sanjaya, did Duryodhana say when he saw that Karna turning away from
the field upon whom my sons had reposed all their hopes of victory?
      Thou, O Bharata, art loved and regarded by every body. Indeed, what thou
considerest to be beneficial for the Kurus was pointed out to me, O Muni, by
Vidura and Bhishma and Drona. O Kesava, I have no sinful feelings towards the
Pandavas. Vaisampayana said, Thus exhorted by that high-souled sage, the son of
Pandu, O king, with his mind free from anxiety, continued to live in the forest
of Kamyaka. Tell me, O Sanjaya, what Rohinis son, well-skilled in encounters
with the mace and well acquainted with all its rules, did on that occasion!
      Rushangu, O Bharata, was an old Brahmana, who was always devoted to
ascetic penances. Then Shalya, O monarch, desirous of slaying him, pierced king
Yudhishthira the just, that mighty car-warrior with many sharp arrows. Then
Suryavarman, displaying his great lightness of hand, pierced Dhananjaya with
hundreds of straight arrows, O monarch. Utanka said, Let it be so, O king.
Laughing at the Rishi who was stupefied by passion, the god said, I do not, O
Brahmana, at all wonder at this!
      Cease now, O Bhima! I am, O monarch, well-pleased with thee and my
resentment against thee hath been destroyed. Let, therefore, the dice be cast
and the rules of play be fixed, O Yudhishthira. The throats of some were blue,
and the ears of some were long, O Bharata. Then the (other) sons of Pandu,
surrounding Yudhishthira, all proceeded to the encounter, upon which, O king, a
fierce battle was fought.
      Through my affection for thee, O Dhananjaya, I have related this mystery
to thee. Thou shouldst not, O king, think highly of sacrifice. Ashtavakra said,
O king, O leader of fierce legions, in this assembly of monarchs of unrivalled
power who have met together, I am unable to find out Vandin, chief of the
controversialists. Bhishma said, After he had quartered there, on third day, O
king, Jamadagnis son of high vows, sent a message to me, saying, I have come
here, do what is agreeable to me. O puissant one, like Matali himself, I am fit
to act as the driver of even Indra in watchfulness, in managing the steeds, in
knowledge of coming danger and of the means of avoiding it, and in competence to
avoid it in practice.
      O thou of beautiful thighs and fair complexion, accept me as thy lord!
Then, O monarch, the son of Drona covered the Pandava troops, O sire, with thick
showers of arrows, O bull of Bharatas race. He pierced Yudhishthira, O bull of
Bharatas race, with a hundred arrows, and Bhimasena with seventy, and Sahadeva
with seven. The valiant son of Subala, filled with rage, O king, in that
encounter, pierced Satyakis armour and then cut off his golden standard. I do
not cherish the least fear, O Yudhishthira, of even Shakra himself!
      The Rakshasa became stronger by break of day, therefore, hasten, O Bhima!
O my daughter of a lovely brow, the wrong pot of rice thou tookest as food. O
father, whatever boon thou wilt confer on me I shall surely accept gladly! Then
Duryodhana, O monarch, said these proud words unto Yudhishthira in the midst of
his brothers and of the high-souled Krishna and Rama of immeasurable energy,
Protected by the Kaikeyas and the Srinjayas and the high-souled Pancalas, behold
ye with all those foremost of kings, seated together, this battle that is about
to take place between me and Bhima! Fearlessly that invincible warrior, filled
with rage, assailed with keen arrows all the Pandus, and Dhrishtadyumna the son
of Prishta, and Shikhandi, and the sons of Draupadi, and the large bands of the
Pancalas, and the Kaikeyas, O sire, and the Somakas!
      The son of Kunti, without being cheerful, said these words unto Kesava,
The arrival of Satyaki, O mighty-armed one, is scarcely agreeable to me. Arjuna,
in particular, thinking all the while, O king, Ekalavya, saw Drona in private
and relying upon his preceptors affection for him, said, Thou hadst lovingly
told me, clasping me, to thy bosom, that no pupil of thine should be equal to
me. O thou of the fairest complexion, as regards a woman, she hath her father
for her protector or her husband. Then, O king, the combat with trees between
that human being and the Rakshasa, became so terrible that the region around
soon became destitute of trees. Mahadeva replied, Cook these jujubes, O thou of
excellent vows!
      How then, O sinless one, could Bhima notice any lapses in thee! Since
thou didst not forcibly compel them to forbear, therefore, O slayer of Madhu, I
shall, filled with wrath, denounce a curse on thee. Penetrate the Bharata army,
O hero, for I shall slay the wicked-souled Duryodhana and his army today with my
keen shafts! If thou beest, O king, propitiously disposed to me, then ask her to
grant my desire. Come, come, quickly, O crow, for I am waiting for thee.
      And saluting Kripa and walking round him, O king, Yudhishthira,
accomplished in speech, said these words unto that warrior of great valour.
Yonder, O Brahmana, the Somakas and the Panchalas, possessed of great fame, are
careering amid my troops like a forest-conflagration. The Gandharva continued,
Thus addressed by Vasishtha, Viswamitra, O Partha, then forcibly seized Nandini,
that cow (white) like the swan or the moon, and attempted to take her away,
afflicting her with stripes and persecuting her otherwise. Hereafter at the
command of Yudhishthira, O monarch, Arjuna, did not move from the city of
Senavindu but sent his troops only and brought under his sway those five
countries and peoples. Vaisampayana said,--Possessing a knowledge of the past,
the present and the future, and seeing all things as if present before his eyes,
the learned son of Gavalgana, O Bharata, coming quickly from the field of
battle, and rushing with grief (into the court) represented unto Dhritarashtra
who was plunged in thought that Bhishma the grandsire of the Bharatas had been
slain.
      And there, O king, the illustrious Deity cut off the heads of Madhu and
Kaitabha with his keenedged discus! And broken lances, O king, and the head of
elephant drivers, and beautiful housings of elephants, and chords resplendent
with gold, and collars, and darts and mallets and quivers, diverse kinds of
machines, and beautiful bows, short arrows with polished heads, with hooks and
iron crows for guiding elephants, bells of diverse shape, and hilts decked with
gold, were seen by us falling down or (already) fallen along with riders of
steeds. Here, in this quarter, at a place called Usiravija, by the side of the
golden lake, king Marutta performed, O foremost of Brahmanas, a sacrifice.
Hearing him, Bhima said, Look on this encounter, O brother, like a stranger.
And, O most praiseworthy of the descendants of Bharata!
      This thy race, O king, owing to its learning and behaviour, and owing
also to its being adorned with every accomplishment, is most distinguished among
all royal dynasties. On hearing of them, O Bharata, the kings of other lands
came to his capital. O lord of men, this is the holy spring that belongeth to
Indra. Bhurishrava too, O son of Rohini, and the valiant chief of the Madras
have fallen! O great river!
      My wish also is precisely such, but, O holy one, I have no power (to
carry them out)! That dart, O king, pierced the heart of Satyasena in that
battle and reduced it into a hundred fragments. Neither the loss of my husband,
O Madhava, nor loss of wealth, nor our hostility with the Kurus ever
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed by her, Sauri the friend of Partha, then
comforted his paternal aunt, Pritha, afflicted with grief on account of her
sons. They, however, O king, that were heroes, casting off all fear which is so
difficult of being cast off, and observing the vow of warriors, fearlessly did
their duty. Indeed, O Dhritarashtra, thou so fond of thy son, art very much to
be blamed for this, for knowing well his sinfulness, thou followest yet his
counsel.
      And, O thou of excellent vows, as long as Panchali will hold this vessel,
without partaking of its contents fruits and roots and meat and vegetables
cooked in thy kitchen, these four kinds of food shall from this day be
inexhaustible. Set him at liberty, O chief of the Kurus. O monarch, I see not
any other means by which we may accomplish our end. And from that time, O king,
Garuda hath ever lived in friendship with that snake. Suyodhana will never make
peace by giving up the kingdom, without, O Partha, undergoing at our hands a
wholesale destruction with his kinsmen.
      Therefore, do without delay what thou, O thou of Vrishni race, thinkest
to be proper and beneficial for the Pandavas, or what, indeed, should next be
done. Shalya also, excited with rage, O king, slaughtered many Somakas and
Pandavas, and once more afflicted Yudhishthira with many keen shafts. Thy sons
then, O monarch, proceeded towards the car of Karna. Those high-souled warriors,
surrounding that great bowman, the ruler of the Madras, stood, O king, desirous
of battling on every side. O, tell me truly all about this.
      Then Shakuni, the son of the Gandhara king, possessed of eloquence, O
monarch, said unto Duryodhana these words, How is this that we are standing
here, while the Madraka host is being slaughtered before our eyes? Still Karna
will not be able to slay thee, O Dhananjaya! Vyasa said, I give thee permission,
O king. And drinking it, O king, regain thou thy sobriety. Blessed be thou, I
shall now go and accomplish what is so conducive, O handsome one, to my benefit!
      Thou, O Karna, challengest Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, even like a
hare challenging a mighty elephant with tusks large as plough-shafts, and with
the juice issuing out of its mouth and rent cheeks. I will sincerely endeavour,
O Vidura, to bring about peace between the Kurus and the Srinjayas who are about
to be slaughtered in battle. I depend entirely upon thee, O king of kings. O
Bharata, O Ajamida, let not the prosperity of the foe be acceptable to thee.
That slayer of hostile heroes, O king, shrouding all the quarters with showers
of arrows, slew Sushenas driver, and piercing Sushena himself again with three
shafts, and then with three other broad-headed arrows, cut off his bow of great
strength into three fragments.
      The king Jarasandha, on whose behalf propitiatory ceremonies aged, O
tiger among men, came out and gathered there to behold the fight. Vaisampayana
continued, Thus addressed by her, O Bharata, the Brahmana embraced her, and they
both began to weep in silence, afflicted with grief. 23 Sanjaya said, While
Sahadeva, filled with rage, was thus blasting thy host, Duhshasana, O great
king, proceeded against him, the brother against the brother. Here, O king, are
seen holy sages and gods, together with virtuous and highsouled Brahmanas. He
then became celebrated, O Dhananjaya, as a speaker of truth.
      There, behold, O son of Kunti, the Panchajanya of Krishna, exceedingly
beautiful and of the hue of the moon, as also the blazing Kaustubha on his
breast and his triumphal garland. He that is desirous of snatching the blazing
prosperity of his foe, should, O bull of the Bharata race, bring every direction
under his subjection like the charioteer taming the steeds with his whip.
Shalya, the king of the Madras, hath been slain, and Jayadratha also, O Krishna,
hath been slain! O blessed one, go at thy ease. Tell me also, O Suta, what
Duryodhana did after that.
      Having said these words unto the queenly Ulupi, the daughter of the snake
chief, the illustrious Chitrangada proceeded to where her husband lay on the
Earth and addressing him, said, Rise, O dear lord, thou occupiest the foremost
place in the affections of the Kuru king (Yudhishthira). O hero, slay our foes
in battle like Indra slaying the Danavas. O Janardana, he will truly give us
beneficial counsel; and O Krishna, I will do in battle what he will say. And, O
king, that son of Diti, who was known as Hiranyakasipu, was known in this world
among men as the powerful Sisupala. All those, O lord, were slain by the Pandus
and the Srinjayas!
      And many, fallen on the field of battle, cried aloud, saying--O father, O
brother, O friend, O kinsman, O companion, O maternal uncle, do not abandon me.
O king, with all my desires gratified, I lived happily in thy abode, in fact
more happily there than in my own house. If, O slayer of foes, thou hast both
the Kurus and the Pandavas at thy back, the sovereignty of the whole world and
invincibility before all foes will be thine. Then Saradwats son, O king,
repeatedly feeling great anguish, told Dronas son how his sire had been slain.
That foremost Utanka said,--Since, though able, O Krishna, thou didst not rescue
those foremost ones of Kurus race, who were thy relatives and, therefore, dear
to thee, I shall, without doubt, curse thee.
      If thou, O king of kings, goest to the woods leaving me, I shall the,
follow thee. Then Bhima addressed her, saying,--When, O Kunti, sovereignty has
been won, and when the time has come for thee to enjoy that sovereignty thus
acquired by thy children, when the duties of royalty await discharge by thee,
whence has this desire got hold of thy mind? Tell me also, O Sanjaya, how did
the battle take place there where Drona afflicted the Pandavas on the field.
Vaisampayana continued, Having said these words unto that prince, the adorable
Hara of three eyes, the destroyer of all sins, the consort of Uma, and lord of
wild beasts, the destroyer of (Dakshas) sacrifice, the slayer of Tripura and He
that had plucked out the eyes of Bhaga, surrounded by his dwarfish and hunch-
backed and terrible followers having frightful eyes and ears and uplifted arms,
vanished, O tiger among kings, from that place with his consort Uma! And then, O
Bharata, the wise king, considering himself old in years took counsel with his
virtuous ministers and spiritual adviser for installing Rama as regent of the
kingdom.
      Shortly after, O Partha, the monarch, possessed by the Rakshasa and
terribly afflicted by him, lost all his senses. O thou of mighty arms, I shall,
with my mace, vanquish thee today with all thy younger brothers, as also all the
Pancalas and the Srinjayas and all the other troops thou still hast! O Bharata,
look at me, who am thy father unto you and am old and blind, and still alive.
Yudhishthira said, Therefore, O Sire, I ask thee, I bow to thee, O grandsire,
how shall we, in battle, vanquish thee that art invincible? The king of the
Madras, O monarch, endued with the prowess of a lion or an elephant, will career
fearlessly in battle like the Destroyer himself in wrath amongst creatures at
the time of the universal destruction.
      Doth not the evil-minded Duryodhana with his sons and kinsmen deserve
destruction when, unable to bear the sight of Yudhishthiras prosperity and
finding no other faultless expedient, that wretch, O slayer of Madhu, deprived
us of our kingdom by the sinful expedient of deceitful dice? Learning all this,
he that adhereth to Truth, O king, succeedeth in passing over all paths.’ 5
Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me in detail everything about the ways of that
intelligence by which this wilderness of duties may be safely covered.’ 6
Dhritarashtra said, ‘Alas, great was the distress of that person and very
painful his mode of life! Solicited by me, O fool, thou didst not, from avarice,
give the Pandavas their paternal share, acting according to the counsels of
Shakuni! O best of Brahmanas, for thee I reserved her. O thou of faultless
limbs, O thou that art endued with large eyes casting quick glances, he upon
whom thou wilt look with desire is sure to be stricken.
      Tell me, O highly blessed lady, how may I act towards him so that all may
yet turn up well! That tirtha came to be known in the three worlds after the
name of Indra, O giver of honours! The Pancalas, O king, inspired with the
desire of victory, all rushed with speed against Karna like birds towards a
tree. Of both good and bad there is abundance, O chief of men. There, the Sun is
hanging low in the welkin, O lord!
      And he added, It is not wonderful, O mighty-armed one, in thee, O son of
Devaki, that Partha, having obtained thee for his charioteer, should achieve
feats that are even super-human. Or, if, O monarch, coming hither, they prove
docile and obedient to us, we would then seek to repress them according to the
dictates of political science (as explained by Kanika). Therefore, O heroic son
of Kunti, let not thy meeting with me be fruitless. Having said this, O Bharata,
that conqueror of hostile chiefs, Duryodhana, asked Sanjaya again, anxious to
known more about the doings of the Pandavas. Sport thou with him as thou likest
during the day, O thou that art endued with the speed of the mind!
      Karna said, O Duryodhana, all of us seek to accomplish thy will and, O
king, I see that unanimity at present prevaileth among us! We were also wronged
by thee, O king, by the deprivation of our kingdom, by the cruel words spoken by
thee, and by thy maltreatment of Draupadi! It is parental affection, O thou of
righteous soul, that caused me to fall away from righteousness. If, O sinless
one, thou art sincere in thy vow, then wilt thou, cutting off (from thy person)
this coat of mail born with thy body, and these ear-rings also, bestow them on
me! O foremost of all persons, observant of duty, listen to everything I now
say, so that, with an understanding adapted to my teaching, thou mayst succeed
in attaining to the highest end.
      O thou that art endued with effulgence equal unto that of Sakra himself,
I know it, O Kaurava, for it is manifest, that that man upon whom thou mayest
cast thy eyes in anger is sure to be annihilated! By speaking repeatedly, O son,
my mind becomes weakened. 47 Janamejaya said, This history, O regenerate one,
that I have heard from thee is exceedingly wonderful, this narration, in detail,
of the installation, according to due rites, of Skanda. Thou knowest, O Krishna,
even thing about the means by which it may be accomplished. O holy one, if worn
by any one, he would be freed from hunger and thirst and fear of every kind.
      We shall today, O king, live upon water alone. The prowess, Sanjaya said,
And Dronas son, and Bhurisravas, and Chitrasena, O sire, and the son of
Samyamani also, all fought with Subhadras son. Wherefore then, O Bharata,
acquainted with every morality and versed in all the Agamas, art thou
overwhelmed (with grief) as if from ignorance? The Earth, O monarch, became
strewn with the bodies of men and steeds, and covered with streams of blood that
inspired the timid with terror. Listen, O Krishna, to what I for one think.
      I desire to see, O Narada, Virata and Drupada and the other great
Kshatriyas headed by Dhrishtaketu, as also Shikhandi, the Pancala prince, the
sons of Draupadi, and Abhimanyu, irresistible in battle.’ 2 Yudhishthira said,
‘Ye deities, I do not see here Radha’s son of immeasurable prowess, as also my
high-souled brothers, and Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, those great car-warriors
that poured their bodies (as libations) on the fire of battle, those kings and
princes that met with death for my sake in battle. Listen again, O Brahmana, to
some other auspicious duty that should be discharged if virtue is to be earned!
Avoid anger, O king, that which is given away, that which is done, the
austerities that are practised, the libations that are poured on fire, nor one
of these is ever destroyed or suffereth any diminution. Slaughtered in battle by
those high-souled warriors, the Pandava army began to reel in diverse ways, O
king, like a boat on the waters tossed by the wind. And, O king, the younger
brother of Aswa who was known as Aswapati, a son of Diti, became on earth the
mighty monarch Hardikya.
      From compassion, O best of kings, thou hast acted with great rashness!
Sanjaya continued, Thus addressed by that ornament of battle, viz., Karna, thy
son, worshipping the son of Radha, answered him, with a glad heart, saying,
Accomplish that, O Karna, which thou thinkest. Have then my permission, O Karna!
And, O Bharata, at length at a beautiful place called Pramanakoti on the banks
of the Ganga, he built a palace decorated with hangings of broad-cloth and other
rich stuffs. And dropping the newborn infant on the banks of the river, O
Brahmana, Menaka, the Apsara, being destitute of pity and shame, went away.
      Thy subjects, O king, are well-assured that, like characters on stone,
light in the sun, and billows in the ocean, virtue resideth in thee permanently.
There is no fear of snakes in that place, O thou of Kurus race! Therefore, O
deer, why dost thou reprove me? Some combatant, O king, struck with his feet
some foe that was dead, and some, O king, struck off with his sword, the head of
a falling foe, and some thrust his weapon into the body of a living foe. Then
mighty Satanika, excited with rage, O Bharata, slew the four steeds of
Chitrasena and then his driver.
      Then Shakra, the lord of the deities, endued with blazing prosperity,
addressed Yudhishthira and comforting him, said, ‘O Yudhishthira of mighty arms,
come, come, O chief of men. It is by disposition alone that one becomes
respectable, O Krishna, endued with great intelligence and profound wisdom, the
character of the illustrious Vidura, like unto an ornament (that he wears)
adorns the whole world. Those mighty car-warriors, the sons of Pandu, will,
indeed, avenge their wrongs by destroying the whole race of king Dhritarashtra
with all his counsellors.--(It was thus that I addressed them, and) seeing me
afflicted by great anxiety and my senses tortured, Drona and Bhishma and Kripa
and Dronas son then addressed me, saying, Fear not, O represser of foes, for if
the foe wage hostilities with us, they will not be able to vanquish us when we
take the field. O best of regenerate ones, I shall, therefore, put an end to my
life this very day.’ Having said these words unto his high-souled sire, that
foremost of all persons conversant with Brahman, Dhritarashtra, overwhelmed with
grief, became stupefied. Janamejaya said,--O regenerate one, why was it that the
god Agni become hostile in battle unto Sahadeva, who was fighting simply for the
accomplishment of a sacrifice (and therefore, for the gratification of Agni
himself)?
      My life-breaths depend on thee, O delighter of the Kurus. Before half the
night was over, the son of Drona, O monarch, despatched the large host of the
Pandavas unto Yamas abode. Hearing this, Nala replied, Thou hast not, O monarch,
done me ever so little an injury. When the Harivansa Parva is being recited,
Brahmanas should be fed with frumenty at each successive Parana, O king. Then a
very old mouse, named Kilika, said these just words, O king, in the presence of
all his kinsfolk, Our uncle is not really desirous of earning virtue.
      And Ruru replied, O messenger of heaven! O Yudhishthira, Madhava is the
progenitor as also the destroyer of all created beings of the four species,
(oviparous, etc.,) existing in the three worlds. Thou knowest, O thou of mighty
arms, what the cherished intentions of Duryodhana are, and thou knowest also
that I seek the welfare of king Yudhishthira the just. O Creator of the worlds,
thou hast appointed me their Protector, O Lord of the universe, let not the
mobile and the immobile universe to be destroyed. Vaisampayana continued, Then,
O Bharata, Duryodhana assisted by Kama and Kripa, and the high-souled Bhishma
pacified Drona.
      Flight from battle, O king, is not the practice of those that are
honourable, nor does it lead to heaven! Or, O exalted one, grant permission for
myself being installed at the sacrifice along with these my younger brothers,
for permitted by thee, O Krishna. Therefore, O son of Pandu exert thy might.
Expecting diverse good things and benefits from thee, O Arjuna, we have always
uttered blessings on thee. It has been said, O king, that ones guest should take
that which one takes oneself.
      At the ninth Parana, he acquires, O Bharata, the fruits of that foremost
of sacrifices, viz., the Horse-sacrifice. And, Bharadwaja, O Bharatas son, had
an only son, named Yavakri. Vaisampayana continued,--King Yudhisthira the just,
hearing these words of Dhananjaya, replied unto him in a grave and collected
tone, saying,--O bull of the Bharata race, set thou out, having made holy
Brahmanas utter benedictions on thee, to plunge thy enemies in sorrow and to
fill thy friend with joy. Then Bhimasena, O king, and Dhrishtadyumna the son of
Prishata resisted them with four kinds of forces. Though struck with keen arrows
and though they looked like porcupines in consequence of those arrows sticking
to their limbs, still thy troops, O bull of Bharatas race, fled not from Partha
in that battle.
      In course of time, O bull of the Bharata race, making thee the sole
cause, the assembled Kshatriyas of the world will be destroyed, O Bharata, for
the sins of Duryodhana Vaisampayana said,--That bull among men, Duryodhana,
continued to dwell in that, assembly house (of the Pandavas). Besides this, O
king, I have no other beneficial words to utter, O chastiser of foes, everything
that should be learnt in this world is already known to thee. Having caused that
river to flow, Vibhatsu, that slayer of hostile heroes and bull among men,
addressing Vasudeva said, Yonder, O Krishna, the standard of the Sutas son is
visible. Be silent before me, O Vandin! Skanda replied, Thou, O Sakra, art my
sovereign, as also of the three worlds; mayst thou be prosperous!
      Dhritarashtra said, That which thou tellest me, O Suta, about the battle,
fierce and terrible, between the one and the many, and the victory of that
illustrious one, that story of the prowess of Subhadras son is highly wonderful
and almost incredible. O Bharata, viz., that the Sutas son of great prowess,
alone and unsupported in that battle, fought with all those bowmen who contended
with him to the utmost of their prowess, and checked all those Pandava warriors,
O monarch, with his shafts. Still both those heroes were respected by me, O son
of Radha, at thy word! Therefore, O lord, I think, peace with the Pandavas is
for our good. We know, O Vidura, of whom thou art really fond.
      And smitten with sorrow, O Suyodhana, he indulged in these lamentations,
Where shall I find affluent friends? And Kasyapa said, If thou art so minded,
bite thou then, O king of snakes, this tree. Possessed of great might and great
prowess Baladeva then proceeded to that tirtha where the adorable Grandsire had
created the mountains called Lokaloka, where that foremost of Rishis,
Arshtishena of rigid vows, O thou of Kurus race, had by austere penances
acquired the status of Brahmanhood, where the royal sage Sindhudwipa, and the
great ascetic Devapi, and the adorable and illustrious Muni Vishvamitra of
austere penances and fierce energy, had all acquired a similar status. They,
however, that are wise, observant of virtue, and desirous of doing good unto all
living creatures, they, acquainted with the real nature of the appearance of
creatures in this world, attain at last to the highest end.’ 4 Dhritarashtra
said, ‘O foremost speakers, how may the wilderness of this world be known?
Beholding those Rakshasas, O king, those ascetics of rigid vows made great
endeavours for rescuing the Sarasvati from that plight.
      29 Dhritarashtra said, I have heard from thee, O Sanjaya, of many
poignant and unbearable griefs as also of the losses sustained by my sons.
Vaisampayana said, Then, O king, the mighty son of Bharadyaja presented himself
before Drupada, and addressing that monarch, said, Know me for thy friend. Blest
be thou, O Ajatasatru. Indeed, O Brahmana, I cannot say, Let Draupadi become the
common wife of five brothers. Act, however, now according to my words, O king!
      And he, O king! Therefore, O sire, keep my counsel and exterminate my
foes by a clever device. Narada said, Listen, O king, with calmness to me as I
tell thee what I have heard and seen in that ascetic retreat. See, O Vasava,
sore inflicted with the whip, and harassed exceedingly, he is unable to bear his
burthen. Yudhishthira said, Doth thy peace, O king, thy self-restraint, thy
tranquillity of heart, grow?
      Tell me this, O mighty-armed one, if thou thinkest that I can listen to
it without impropriety!’ 27 The end of Stri-parva on thy bounty. Beholding those
tokens of delight that Kesava manifested, Dhananjaya, O king, with heart in
grief, addressed him, saying, O slayer of Madhu, thou showest great joy at a
time scarcely fit for it, indeed on an occasion for sorrow caused by the death
of Hidimvas son. Think also, O king, of the wonderful knowledge of weapons that
Drona will display in battle when I leave this place for going to Arjuna. Thou
hast, with thy own eyes, O Sanjaya, seen the whole earth, with even her Mlecchas
and nomad tribes, depend upon his grace! Now, O mighty king, have I been
delivered by thy brother Bhima.
      Endued with self-restraint and asceticism and great energy, the child
grew up, O monarch, into a person of highly agreeable features like Soma
himself. But, O Vahnni, as I do not accept the libation of Soma if offered by a
foe, and as I do not strike the weak with my thunderbolt, Vritra seemed to
triumph over me for a time. These the chief of the Yakshas speedily obtained
there, O thou of mighty arms! O thou that art conversant with every duty, be
thou gratified with the child whose friends and kinsmen have all been slain and
who himself knows nothing of what has happened. Arjuna, and Bhimasena, and the
two sons of Madri by Pandu, and the Pancala prince Dhrishtadyumna, and the
unvanquished Shikhandi, and Uttamaujas, and Yudhamanyu, and the mighty car-
warrior Satyaki, and the (five) sons of Draupadi, and those amongst the
Pancalas, O king, that were yet alive, and all the Pandavas, and all their
elephants, and foot-soldiers by hundreds upon hundreds, all proceeded with
Yudhishthira.
      Having duly bowed unto him, O bull among kings, they said these words, O
monarch, from desire of doing good unto Kartikeya. And we have served our
superiors and subdued our The king said, It seemeth, O possessor of divine
energy, that thou art no human being. Vaishampayana continued, Hearing these
cruel words, Dhritarashtra, that ruler of men, fell down, O monarch, on the
earth, deprived of his senses. It was, therefore, O monarch, that he blazed not
forth, while consuming the forest of Khandava, for the destruction of Mandapalas
children. Raising him and embracing him closely, the king smelt his head and
once more said these words unto him, O Dhananjaya, O thou of mighty arms, I have
been greatly honoured by thee.
      Kripa was installed as the preceptor and Parikshit was made over to him
as his disciple, O chief of Bharata’s race. Janamejaya said,--O thou foremost of
all conversant with the Vedas, how did that game at dice take place, fraught
with such evil to the cousins and through which my grand-sires, the son of
Pandu, were plunged into such sorrow? Therefore, O thou best of Brahmanas, cast
thou this fire of thy wrath into the waters. and beating their breasts, they
cried aloud and wept and uttered loud shrieks, O monarch! At present, however, O
king, thou hast not inspired love in me by any act of thine, nor have I myself
been plunged into distress.
      Their nails were long, their teeth were large and their lips also, O
Bharata, were protruding. Janamejaya said, After having conferred that boon on
Utanka, O foremost of regenerate persons, what did the mighty-armed Govinda of
great celebrity next do? Having obtained that inexhaustible wealth belonging to
thee, O bull of Bharatas race, those highly blessed ones, whose foe had been
slain, uttered loud cries of exultation. Those two ancient Daityas, Taraka and
Viprachitti of great energy, were in ancient times, O king, slain by the aid of
acts and means! And that lady of sweet smiles told those ascetics, O Bharata,
all that had happened to herself with the minutest details, O mighty-armed one,
about her abduction, and her rejection by Salwa.
      And, O king, Yayati also begot on Devayani two sons called Yadu and
Turvasu, who were like Indra and Vishnu. Even now I am uneasy, O carpenter; I,
indeed, dread him even now. Bhima said, Welcome, O beauteous lady, Except the
glad tidings thou bringest me, I need, O thou of exceeding beauty, no other aid
whatever. I have, however, O hero, a compact to make with Vaikartana, and that
is this: I will utter whatever words I may wish, in this ones presence. And thus
equipt, they rushed, O king at each other, like two lions in the deep forest,
both seeking the companionship of the same lioness in her season.
      O foremost of superior Brahmanas, the course of Time is very subtle and
difficult to understand, inasmuch as Kunti, abandoning sovereignty, became
desirous of taking up her abode in the forest. Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, how
we and the enemy both stood for battle on that occasion and what was then the
strength of the two armies. Taking thee, O Kaurava, to heaven, I will grant thee
there all my celestial weapons. Seeing her pale and plunged in anxiety, the
righteous-souled Vasishtha, that foremost of men, O king, said these words unto
her. I do not, O thou of Dasarathas race, see king Yudhishthira the just.
      Then Dronas son, O monarch, with tearful eyes and breathing like a snake,
said these words unto that chief of Bharatas race, that foremost of all the
kings on earth, Truly, there is nothing stable in the world of men, since thou,
O tiger among men, liest on the bare earth, stained with dust! Come to me, O
timid one, wedding me, O beautiful one, according to the Gandharva form. Then, O
Bharata, thy troops, beholding Bhima mace in hand, thought that Yama himself,
armed with his fatal bludgeon, was in their midst. The son of Kunti will
certainly slay many of our foremost Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, the
distinctive indications of the cars of all those who, excited with wrath and
headed by Bhimasena, had proceeded against Drona. Tell me this, O Janardana.
      O scorcher of foes, I shall employ myself in doing what is agreeable to
thee. O chastiser of enemies, have the fates been propitious unto us? Do thou, O
Karna, proceed against him, for there is no other bowman (among us that can do
so). O my lord! Thou knowest, O holy one, that the regions created for me were
all eternal.
      Arjuna said, I am pleased with thee, O tiger among men. After they had
returned, O king, and separately taken up their positions in well-formed array,
an awful battle set in, in which blood flowed freely like water. See O Matali,
if there is anybody here whom thou canst elect. Thou art my older sister, O let
me have thy sanction. What, indeed, wilt thou, O Janardana, say of this great
feat of Arjuna while speaking of it in the midst of assemblies.
      Arjuna said, Impelled by whom, O son of the Vrishni race, doth a man
commit sin, even though unwilling and as if constrained by force? Kanwa
continued, In the same way, O son of Gandhari, thou livest, O son, as long as
thou approachest not the heroic sons of Pandu in battle. Tell me quickly, O
blessed lady, what that object is upon which thou hast set thy heart! Cherishing
that hope within his heart, he said unto Karna, O Sutas son, Partha never wishes
to fight, standing before thee! And the god of a thousand eyes (Indra) suddenly
abstained from giving rain in his territory; so that his people began to suffer
and O lord of the earth!
      O king, it was about this time that Drona heard that the illustrious
Brahmana Jamadagnya, that slayer of foes, that foremost one among all wielders
of weapons, versed in all kinds of knowledge, had expressed a desire of giving
away all his wealth to Brahmanas. O thou of mighty arms, through thy grace, we
will sleep happily this night. The noise made by the cars of those impetuous
warriors who proceeded with great speed, became very loud, O monarch, and
touched the heavens. These and many other omens, foreshadowing fear and danger,
were seen, O king, and filled the hearts of men with anxiety. Conversant with
what are the vital limbs of the body, the son of Pritha, however, O monarch,
with the greatest ease, struck the ruler of the Madras with four and ten cloth-
yard shafts, aiming at the latters vital limbs.
      80 Sanjaya said, Then, O king, Dhananjaya, desirous of rescuing Kuntis
son Bhima who, assailed by many, foremost of warriors of the Kuru army, seemed
to sink (under that attack), avoided, O Bharata, the troops of the Sutas son and
began, with his shafts, to despatch those hostile heroes (that were opposed to
Bhima) to the regions of death. Before my eyes, O mighty-armed one, making the
very hair stand on end, violent were the blows that thou hadst to bear, O
delighter of the Yadavas! As people are certainly burnt if they come in contact
with a blazing fire, even so the Srinjayas, O Bharata, were burnt by the Karna-
fire when they came in contact with it. Samvarta said, If, O prince of the
Devas, thou art pleased with us, do thou thyself give all the directions for
this sacrifice, and O Surendra, thyself ordain the sacrificial portions (for the
gods), so that, O god, all the world may know that it hath been done by thee.
And, O protector of men!
      O king, cause Vandin to be brought to my presence. Then thy army, O bull
of Bharatas race, mangled in diverse ways with shafts by the Pandavas eager for
victory, began to fly away from the field. Let the affection thou hadst for the
Pandavas be revived in thy bosom, and let it, O bull of Bharatas race, lead to
the establishment of peace. But thereupon a quantity of air alone came out of
the illustrious Rishis stomach, with a sound that was as loud, O child, as the
roar of the clouds. During the progress of that great carnage, Govinda,
beholding the field of battle, addressed Savyasaci, saying, Behold, O Partha,
how great and awful is this carnage, O Bharata, of Kshatriyas on Earth for the
sake of Duryodhana.
      But, O thou who art conversant with the rules of morality, is not this
still more wrongful that that great person, viz., Kansa, whose food this one
ate, hath been slain by him? O lord of the earth! Where hast thou been, O
sinless one, and whence the cause of this thy mental disquietude? And a very
large number of combatants, O Bharata, lost their weapons, or had their thighs
broken. Confined in the temple of Shiva and offered as sacrifice unto him like
so many animals, do not these monarchs dedicated unto that god feel the most
poignant misery, O bull of the Bharata race?
      But, O Brahmana, do not disclose this fact to anybody, for if it be
known, persons desirous of obtaining this power, will, from curiosity, always
trouble my sons. O thou of mighty arms, they that fight with warriors more
eminent than themselves, have this duty to perform. As regards myself, O bull of
Bharatas race, the fame of these Kurus, as also of all the Pandavas, I will
spread. It was for this disguise, O king, that no one could recognise him as
Dhananjaya. Dhritarashtra said, Tell me what may be done by a person that is
sleepless and burning with anxieties, for thou alone amongst us, O child, art
versed in both religion and profit.
      This shorn earth, O king, now exists for thee! Though devoted to the
performance of his duties, this, however, is the resolution, O Bharata, that he
formed: This Sarasvati shall quickly bring, by force of her current, that
foremost of ascetics, Vasishtha, to my presence. Those two repressors of foes
thus encountering each other in dreadful battle and thus striking each other, O
king, both fell down on the field. It behoveth none else, save thee, O Lord of
the Past and the Future, to destroy those wicked wights that show no regard for
any one. Loud cries of woe arose from among thy troops, O monarch, whilst they
were being slaughtered by Dharmas son, O sire, with diverse kinds of keen shafts
equipped with Kanka feathers and whetted on stone, with numerous broad-headed
arrows, and with diverse kinds of darts and swords and clubs.
      Everything that hath happened seemeth to be due to Destiny, O Sanjaya.
The women, O king, crying ceaselessly, caused the earth to resound with their
voices like a flight of she-ospreys. Having slain, countless warriors, this
Satyaki cometh to thee, O Partha, freed from amid the Kaurva troops, like a lion
from amid a herd of kine. And, O bull among Kshatriyas, my affection and love
for thee have grown with me in consequence of our having sported together in
childhood in the hermitage. He, O Bharata, is the beginning, the middle, and the
end of all creatures.
      O Panchali, let them for thy sake declare in the midst of these
respectable men that Yudhishthira is not their lord, let them thereby make king
Yudhishthira the just a liar. O regenerate one, the worship that sons offer to
their mothers and fathers and that wives offer to their husbands, both seem to
me to be highly difficult. Rising up in haste after worshipping the feet of
Vyasa bending his head, Keshava, O monarch, addressed Dhritarashtra, saying, I
take my leave, O foremost one of Kurus race! Then commenced the battle, O
monarch, of men, elephants, steeds, and cars, engaged in destroying one another.
And O son of Parikshit!
      Hearing such words from thee, as also from the preceptor, O Bharata, I
would then have, with Karna, reflected upon what course I should pursue. Thus
addressed by those brave warriors, Subalas son Shakuni, O king, proceeded to
that spot where thy son was staying, surrounded on all sides by unretreating
heroes. He addressed Arjuna, saying, ‘O thou of great intelligence, it is Time
that cooks every creature (in his cauldron). Let thy anxiety be dispelled, O
Sutas son. That grave act also which was ordained in heaven is known to thee,
How then, O Partha, can peace be concluded with the foe?
      O Chief of all intelligent men, O son of Kunti, the intelligence of this
wicked-minded king of the Chedis, as also of all these monarchs, hath become
perverse. The End of Vana Parva Vaisampayana said, Listen, O lord of men, how
thy great grandfathers passed the period of unrecognition in the city of Virata.
Those sounds, O king, first uttered by the sacrificing Rishi, penetrated into
heaven, and Trita completed that sacrifice after the manner laid down by
utterers of Brahma. (His sister) Subhadra, noticing that the slaughter of her
son had not been mentioned, addressed her brother, saying,--Do thou narrate the
death of my son, O Krishna--and fell down on the earth (in a swoon). Look, O
Matali, if there be any bridegroom here, that is distinguished by the possession
of superior merits, for then I will go to him for respectfully soliciting him to
accept thy daughter.
      O son of Kunti, do thou together with thy ministers, touch (the waters)
of this lake called Punya, and this mountain Bhrigutunga and also (the water of)
these two rivers, called Tushniganga. And, O Bharata, the son of the god of
Justice, the royal Yudhishthira of high soul then called together all his
younger brothers and addressed them, saying, Exiled from our kingdom, we have
passed twelve years. O monarch, it is clear that the ruler of the Salwas waiteth
(for me). But, O Krishna, I dare not, for my own glorification, falsify thy
words. Sanjaya continued, Having said these words unto the king deprived of his
senses and lying with broken thighs, Ashvatthama once more cast his eyes on him
and uttered these words, If, O Duryodhana, thou hast any life in thee still,
listen to these words that are so pleasant to hear.
      Savyasaci, O monarch, caused thy army to tremble and reel like a tempest-
tossed boat exposed on the bosom of the ocean. 45 Shalya said, The abandonment
of the afflicted and the sale of wives and children are, O Karna, prevalent
amongst the Angas whose king thou art. The severed head of Namuchi thereupon
pursued Indra from behind, saying unto him from a near point these words, O
slayer of a friend, O wretch! Sanjaya continued, Hearing these words of Bhishma,
king Duryodhana then asked Drona, O monarch, that foremost one of Angiras race,
saying, O preceptor, in what time canst thou annihilate the troops of Pandus
son? Our animals are all cheerless and seem, O king, to be crying.
      Behold then, O son of Pandu, the well-equipped car of Karna. Sauti said,
Then the king of Gandharvas (the father of Pramadvara) and the celestial
messenger, both of excellent qualities, went to the god Dharma (the Judge of the
dead) and addressed him, saying, If it be thy will, O Dharmaraja, let the
amiable Pramadvara, the betrothed wife of Ruru, now lying dead, rise up with a
moiety of Rurus life. And seeing them gone, Bhishma, the grandfather of the
Kurus, hung down his head from shame, and then, O king, went to his own
quarters. Our acts do not become successful in consequence of destiny alone, nor
of exertion alone, O best of men! Let him come at me like the wind assailing the
mountains, till, with my keen arrows, O son of Kunti, I quell his rage and
desire for battle and take his life.